Chapter 1: Introduction
This dissertation will examine the role of the Russian mass media, in particular television, in the transformation of the Russian state. The mass media is defined by Herman and Chomsky (2008, p. 1) “as a system for communicating messages and symbols to the general populace”, and through this system it integrates individuals into society by creating shared “values, beliefs, and codes of behaviour”. The ‘electronic media’, such as television, is argued by McMahan and Chesebro (2003, p. 135) to have changed the method of gaining knowledge to advance political transition through “more dramatic and powerful representations” of events. It encourages “people to experience such events as if they were active participants” (McMahan, & Chesebro, 2003, p. 135). This dissertation will focus on two processes during the transformation, each being dominant at different stages. 
The first process is democratisation, which was dominant during the transition under President Yeltsin.  Democratisation is defined by Grugel (2002, pp. 3-4) as a contested term, originally meaning “simply a transformation of the political system from non-democracy towards accountable and representative government”. However, it has become a far more diverse and complex concept (Grugel, 2002, pp. 3-4). The process of democratisation is argued by Grugel (2002, p. 32) to have been in motion since the nineteenth century, but has “not been linear or uncontested”. 
The core of democratisation is defined by Arblaster (1987, pp. 8-9) as ‘popular power’. The rhetoric of ‘popular power’ is used by governments to justify its legitimacy as they represent the ‘people’ and are accountable to “the people as the ultimate political authority”, nevertheless, such claims by governments “may be bogus, and very often are” (Arblaster, 1987, pp. 8-9). The importance of the mass media in democracy is argued by Freedom House (n.d., para 1) to be that “a free press plays a key role in sustaining and monitoring a healthy democracy”, with restrictions on the freedom of the press being an indication of the movement by a government to undermine other democratic institutions. Academics such as Lawson (2002, pp. 2-3) have argued that the role of the media has been ‘neglected’ in the study of democratisation. 
This dissertation will be using the transitional approach to democratisation, which focuses on the role of the political elites in creating democratic change (Grugel, 2002, pp. 56-57). The survival of new democracies is argued by Leftwich (1997, p. 527) to need some level of consensus between the political elites and loyality to the developing democratic system. The political elites are argued by Juan Linz (1990) to be an important aspect of democratisation, as they have a dual role of promoting liberalisation to the population and at the same time “they must convey to them the impossibility of overcoming in the short-run the dismal legacy of nondemocratic rulers” (Shin, 1994, pp. 139-140). Loyalty to the democratic system is particularly important, as it requires the acceptance of ‘uncertainty’ with the future of the political elite’s interests and the acceptance of the electoral result (Leftwich, 1997, p. 527). An example of the refusal to accept the electoral result happened in Algeria in 1991, where the democratic procedure was abandoned “when it became clear that the Fundamentalist Islamic Front was about to win” (Leftwich, 1997, p. 527). 
	The transitional approach to democratisation will be adapted as it fails to incorporate the “role of popular struggles” (Grugel, 2002, p. 61). The role of the mass media in the creation of popular movements in favour of democratisation will be addressed. The political transformation in Eastern Europe is argued by Sanders (1992) to be due to the mass media rather than ‘social-political-economic factors’, as the media “played the central, catalytic role” in producing political transformation (McMahan, & Chesebro, 2003, p. 135). However, this approach will be contrasted in the changing dominance of democratisation to securitisation, with a focus on the securitisation of the media (Bacon, Renz, & Cooper, 2006, p. 77).            
The second process is securitisation, which undermined the dominant position of democratisation at the time when President Putin came to power. Bacon, Renz and Cooper (2006, p. 10) have adapted this concept of securitisation from International Relations theory and have applied it to analysing a single state.It can be applied to all types of political systems, as all governments require “a minimum of both persuasion and coercion to survive” (Vuori, 2008, p. 69). Securitisation is defined by Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde (1998) as a “speech act”, which takes place through policy areas being presented in a frame of discourse and where it is “designated as facing ‘an existential threat’ requiring emergency action/special measures and the acceptance of that designation by a significant audience” (Wilkinson, 2007, p. 9). 
Wilkinson (2007, p. 9) argues that successful and failed securitisation can be distinguished by analysing the publics’ reaction to the discourse. The psychological effect of television strengthens the process of securitisation. Television has been argued to create a ‘mean world syndrome’ in which “the viewer believes the world as shown on television reflects what one will see in the everyday life” (Wikinson, & Fletcher, 1995, p. 171). This in turn creates “fearfulness, anxiety, and helplessness” leading the viewer to put more trust in “the efficacy of law enforcement” (Wikinson, & Fletcher, 1995, p. 171; Wober, & Gunter, 1988, pp. 51-52). 
The mass media is the focal point of this dissertation, due to its importance in informing a population and holding governments to account by their citizens. However, there is also the contentious issue that the media can frame politics to manipulate citizens distorting information (Lawson, 2002, pp. 2-3). The distorted information creates hegemony of ‘political and ideological leadership’ creating consent rather than the state using force (Simon, 1982, p. 21). 
To analyse the role of mass media in the transformation of the Russian state, the ‘propaganda model’ will be used, as it allows for the examination of propaganda in a system where “formal censorship is absent” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 1). The ‘propaganda model’ uses five filters, through which “money and power are able to filter the news fit to print, marginalise dissent, and allow the government and dominant private interests to get their messages across to the public” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 1). 
The first filter, “size, ownership and profit orientation of the mass media”, is the limited and concentrated ownership of the mass media, which is integrated into the market system and has led “to sharp constraints by owners and other market-profit-orientated forces”. These have ‘common interests’, “with other major corporations, banks and government” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 4-13). The second filter, “advertising revenue”, gives an advantage to media outlets, as they do not depend on sales to cover the cost of production. The media outlets that fail to attract advertising revenue have a disadvantage and this eventually leads to an increased concentration of ownership, with successful takeovers of the disadvantaged media outlets. The dependence on advertising revenue results in constraints from the corporations providing the revenue, as a result the media will not produce critical material that could offend those providing the revenue or disrupt the ‘buying mood’ (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 13-17).
While the first and second filters focus on the ownership and profit orientation of the mass media, the other three filters are important in producing the official line from the elite. The third filter, “sourcing”, states that the mass media requires a steady “flow of the raw material of news” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 17). To gain this steady flow, the media concentrates on the centres of corporate and government power, as these have the public image “of being recognisable and credible”. The dependency on official sources can lead the media “following a special agenda” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 17-22). The fourth filter, “flak and the enforcers”, is an important aspect in keeping the media within a ‘special agenda’. Flak is produced by individuals or organisations and is a negative response to the media, which is produced in a variety of forms, from letters of complaint to government legislation. If flak is produced on a large scale it becomes “costly to the media”. The government is a major producer of flak to keep the media following the official line (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 24-27). 
The fifth filter, “anti-communism as a control mechanism”, is the use of the dominant ideology to encouage the population to mobilise against ‘the enemy’, resulting in uncritical support for government actions. As a result, the requirement of “serious evidence” to justify government actions is effectively “suspended” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 27-29). The ‘propaganda model’ will be the main analytical tool. However, there will be greater emphasis on certain filters during the analysis. The third chapter will have an overall focus on the first filter and during the analysis of securitisation there will be a focus on the fourth and fifth filters. The fourth chapter will analyse the Chechen conflicts with a focus on the third filter of the ‘propaganda model’.   
To examine the role of television in both the processes that took place during the transformation of the Russian state, the dissertation will seek to answer the following research question:
To what extent has the television been a key factor in political transformation of the Russian state and what role has it played in each process of the transformation? 
In answering the research question, this dissertation will seek to accept or reject the following research hypothesis: 
Television has been a key factor in political transformation of contemporary Russian politics, but has remained under the control of political elites throughout the transformation of the state. 	 
The dissertation will be structured into five chapters, the first chapter is this introduction and the fifth chapter provides the conclusion. The second chapter examines the consequential hypothesis, ‘the Glasnost reform of the Soviet mass media was a key factor in the collapse of the Soviet Union and a key aspect in understanding the resulting role of the media in the emerging Russian state’. To successfully examine the consequential hypothesis, the second chapter will answer the subsidiary research question, ‘to what extent did the changing technology of the Soviet mass media impact in the collapse of the Soviet Union?’ 
The third chapter will examine the role of the mass media in the process of democratisation of and critically contrast the role of the media in securitisation. This chapter will examine two consequential hypotheses. Firstly, ‘the genesis of the ‘free media’ was a contributing factor in the initial success, however, it eventually undermined the process democratisation’ and secondly, ‘securitisation has become the dominant process in the transformation through the use of television, resulting in the further securitisation of the mass media’. To examine the consequential hypotheses, this chapter will answer two subsidiary research questions. Firstly, ‘what influence did the Russian mass media have during President Yeltsin’s terms in office and what key events altered the influence that the media had?’ and secondly, ‘to what extent has securitisation taken place within the Russian state under President Putin and what impact has it had on the mass media?’
The fourth chapter provides a case study of the Chechen conflicts. It contrasts the reporting of each and argues that the difference between the coverage highlights the changing dominance of each process. This chapter will examine the consequential hypothesis, ‘the role of television in the Chechen conflicts is an important factor in explaining the outcomes of each of the conflicts’. To accept or reject the consequential hypothesis, the chapter will answer the subsidiary research question ‘what impact did television have in the outcomes of the Chechen conflicts?’ 
 
Chapter 2: The changing technology of the Soviet mass media and its impact in the collapse of the Soviet Union.
	This chapter will examine the changing technology of the Soviet mass media and the impact of television in the collapse of the Soviet Union. To examine the impact of the changing technology, the subsidiary research question, ‘to what extent did the changing technology of the Soviet mass media impact in the collapse of the Soviet Union?’ will be answered. To answer this question, the chapter will focus on three subjects. Firstly, a historical analysis on the establishment of the essential principle in the role of the mass media, beginning with the overthrow of the Tsar, will be made. Secondly, an analysis of the changing political situation in the Soviet Government and its impacts on the control of the mass media will be examined. Finally, it will focus on the Glasnost (‘openness’) reforms of the late 1980s and its contribution to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that the media, particularly the growth of television, was a major factor in the collapse of the Soviet Union.         
To begin, essential principle of the role of the mass media was affected by a key event. The key event took place under the Provisional Government, which was established after the overthrow of the Tsar in February, 1917. The overthrow of the Tsar had led to the destruction of the Tsarist censorship apparatus, including the destruction of the Tsarist police and security forces (Hosking, 1992, p. 35; Resis, 1977, pp. 275-276). The destruction resulted in the undermining of any effective power of coercion and was unable to exert control over the press (Hosking, 1992, p. 35). 
However, the ability of the Provisional Government to exert control over the press changed after it was almost deposed in July, 1917, and resulted in a crackdown on the far left press (Resis, 1977, p. 276). The Provisional Government took actions against the Bolsheviks through the use of the mass media to spread propaganda. An example was the lie that “Lenin was a German agent or spy” (Resis, 1977, pp. 280-281). The crackdown against the Bolsheviks led them to take action against the Provisional Government, which they successfully overthrew in October, 1917 (Hosking, 1992, pp. 49-50; Sakwa, 2008b, pp. 3-4). The suppression of the Bolshevik media is argued by Resis (1977, pp. 280-283) to have caused a major change in Lenin’s views on the ‘free media’. This change led to the suppression of all counter revolutionary newspapers (Resis, 1977, pp. 289-295). This suppression was due to fears that the freedom of the media would be “tantamount to suicide for the Soviet regime”, as it would allow the bourgeoisie to gain a concentration of ownership over the press and carry out a propaganda campaign (Resis, 1977, pp. 289-295). 
This fear of the media being privately owned is justified, as media ownership is a key factor in the debate on the power of the mass media. A contemporary example of domestic media being a threat to a government can be seen in the 2002 coup against Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez. This coup resulted in failure and after two days Chavez returned to power (Golinger, 2007, pp. 69-78). The media was used to distort the reporting of attacks on protestors organised by the plotters, to justify the removal of Chavez and at the same time create legitimacy for the new government (Jones, 2009, pp. 323-330). After the success of the coup, one of the plotters, Vice-Admiral Victor Ramirez Perez said to a journalist “we had a deadly weapon: the media. And now that I have the opportunity, let me congratulate you” (Edwards, & Cromwell, 2009, p. 193). The coup was an example of the influence of private interests through ownership of the ‘free media’ in the shaping of the populations perception of events for their own political ends. So the fear of a privatised media is understandable by radical democratic or revolutionary governments.
Instead, the ownership of the mass media became concentrated under the Bolshevik party. This concentration took place after the territorial concessions to the German Government in leaving the First World War and led to the breakdown in relations between the revolutionary parties, resulting in the Bolshevik party achieving the position of ‘one party rule’ (Hosking, 1992, p. 62).  The concentration of state control over the mass media established the ideological doctrine of Marxist-Leninism, which constrained reporting in the government’s interest. This control also reflects the changing political situation in the Soviet Government. For example, during Stalin’s rule the media had “exceedingly narrow limits on public debate” (Brown, 2004a, pp.4-5). The Soviet mass media began to portray an ‘imaginary’ positive image and through censorship was able to hide the terrible mistake of farm collectivisation which began in 1930 (Hosking, 1992, pp. 162-168). Farm collectivisation resulted in a man-made famine, as production dropped and a greater portion of the harvest was taken (Hosking, 1992, pp. 166-167).  
During the early 1930s there was the significant development in the Soviet mass media, with the introduction of television, which was expanded after the Second World War with the creation of television centres in the 1950s “in the republican capitals and other major cities” (Flenley, 1997, p. 111). Television is argued by Flenley (1997, p. 111) to have had the same role as radio and print. This role was to serve the interests of the party by spreading their ideological message and creating support for government policies. However, Flenley (1997, pp. 111-112) argues that the new medium was far more complicated to control, as it allowed for the viewer to form their own interpretation of the images that were broadcast, rather than just accepting the given interpretation.
The control over the media was challenged in the 1960s with the rise of the ‘Underground Press’. The ‘Underground Press’ had been reduced by Khrushchev with the de-Stalinisation reforms, a period of the “early 1960s... known as the ‘thaw’” (Schreiber, 1978, p. 32). These reforms are argued by Filtzer (1993, pp. 8-12) to have failed due to resistance from within the bureaucracy. Reforms threatened or at least were perceived as a threat by the bureaucrats, who rose into positions of power due to Stalin’s purges (Filtzer, 1993, pp. 8-12). An aspect of these reforms was a greater freedom of the mass media within state control, including works that were previously banned being publicly available (Schreiber, 1978, p. 32). 
The Brezhnev-Kosygin regime brought an end to the ‘thaw’ (McNair, 1991, p. 42). There was a consequence in the failure of reform. While the ‘Underground Press’, has originally formed by a small group of the intelligentsia, it is argued by Schreiber (1978, pp. 32-34) to have become a ‘political entity’. The ‘Underground Press’ became far more direct in their criticisms of the government (Schreiber, 1978, pp. 32-34). The ‘Underground Press’ posed a threat to the regime in its ‘political entity’, resulting in the government’s tactical use of the official press to legitimise the arrests of dissents and to discredit their publications as attempts to “subvert the communist revolution” (Schreiber, 1978, p. 36).
It was during this period that television growth and the demands of an increasingly educated population, leading to a format designed to entertain and inform (Flenley, 1997, p. 111). The growth of television can be seen in the percentage of the Soviet population viewing where in “1960 only 5 percent” but by “1986 fully 93 percent of the population were viewers”, which covered “86 percent of the territory of the” Soviet Union (Mickiewicz, 1988, p. 3).  This growth of television allowed for transmissions of information across the Soviet Union “reaching everyone nearly simultaneously” (Mickiewicz, 1988, p. 4).There was also the impact of seeing the political leaders without the image being “retouched”, which was argued by Flenley (1997, p. 112) to be “unfortunate”, as during this time the political system was becoming “rule by a gerontocracy”. 
Reform returned to the political agenda with Gorbachev achieving power in 1985 (Hosking, 1992, p. 456). Gorbachev held an agenda of reform, as he viewed the political system to be similar to its autocratic past, due to political power being held above with no control from below (Lewin, 1988, pp. 122-123). The reform of Perestroika was originally designed to alter the power structure rather than creating radical change, and was attached to the policy of Glasnost, which began in spring 1986 to build support for Perestroika (Hosking, 1992, p. 457; Flenley, 1997, p. 112). The Glasnost (openness) reforms originally designed to strengthen the Soviet system, by using the media to highlight the weaknesses caused by corruption (Sakwa, 2005a, p. 3). Glasnost also held an important function of providing pressure on bureaucrats, especially on economic issues (McNair, 1991, pp. 53-56). Glasnost changed the role of the mass media in the reporting economic issues with “the task of publicising mistakes and defects in the running of the economy, rectifying them, and preventing their duplication” (McNair, 1991, p. 56).     
The first major test of Glasnost was the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in April, 1986, which received minimal coverage by the Soviet media (Mickiewicz, 1988, pp. 60-63). The lack of coverage caused panic, as the population relied on Western radio reports which exaggerated the situation (Hosking, 1992, p. 457). After the Chernobyl disaster there was public dissatisfaction with the reporting from the Soviet media, in particular the limited reporting on domestic disasters (McNair, 1991, p. 65). The public dissatisfaction resulted in the broadening of Glasnost (Hosking, 1992, pp. 457-458). 
The Chernobyl disaster promoted the importance of media criticism, as it highlighted the failure of the command economy with nuclear technology (Hosking, 1992, pp. 457-458). This broadening of Glasnost meant that a larger selection of themes could be publicly discussed and Flenley (1997, p. 112) argues that the broadening gave the message that it was “acceptable to engage in open criticism of the government and its policies”. However, while the broadening of Glasnost allowed for criticism, it did not create a ‘free press’ as it was still under the control of the state and through state control it was able to prevent criticism of high ranking officials (Flenley, 1997, pp. 112-113). The broadening of Glasnost also meant that Soviet history during the Stalinist era could be explored by the media, such as the famine caused by farm collectivisation, which consequentially fuelled the nationalist movements (Pearson, 1991, pp. 93-94). 
The broadening of Glasnost is argued by Flenley (1997, p. 112) to have another major impact with the coverage of the political elite, resulting in bringing an end to the fear that “underpinned Soviet society”. The coverage of political elites is argued by McNair (1991, pp. 74-75) to have allowed the Soviet people to see the “drama and debate that goes on behind the scenes” of the formation of government decisions. The impact can be seen in letters written to ‘Argumenty I Fakty’. An example was the televising of parliament resulting in criticism of the ‘People’s Deputies’, in this case from Garayev who complained about their behaviour in parliament: “some people walk, some people read, some people talk to their neighbours and some are just having a nap. And these are our deputies whose task is to solve most the important problems in the country” (McKay, 1991, pp. 183-184). McKay (1991, p. 184) also notes that the ‘live televising of parliament’ was brought to an end, due to its popularity causing large numbers of the population taking time off work to watch and resulting in a negative impact on economic production (Pearson, 1991, p. 93).
The nationalist movements were able to provide an outlet of anger for the population on a range of issues, including environmental issues (Suny, 1992, p. 489). The Chernobyl disaster was the most recent event in a series of environmental damage, which had been an issue since the rapid industrialisation under Stalin (Suny, 1992, p. 489). The nationalist movements were able to destabilise the Soviet Union due to the democratisation of the Soviet system, as it allowed nationalist movements to gain power (Sakwa, 2005a, pp. 3-4). The reforms under Gorbachev to alter the political system was argued by Walker (1993, pp. 74-80) to have lacked a coherent ‘plan’ and the broadening of Glasnost resulted in the inability to control the social forces that were unleashed. 
In conclusion, the changing technology, with the rise of television, did have a direct impact on the collapse of the Soviet Union. The population’s perception of national politics was altered and resulted in a politicised population, as the political system became more transparent. However, the impact of television was not until the policy of Glasnost and even then it was not until the Chernobyl disaster, which resulted in the broadening of Glasnost. The broadening of Glasnost had serious consequences in releasing the social forces, which caused the collapse of the Soviet Union, due to the rise of nationalist movements.   
Chapter 3: The role of the mass media in the transformation of the Russian state.
This chapter will examine the role of the mass media, specifically television, in the processes of democratisation and securitisation in the transformation of the Russian state. It will then critically contrast the role of the mass media in each process and its consequences. To begin, the process of democratisation will be examined with focus on the emergence and liberalisation of the Russian state. In specific, this section will focus on the market reforms, the 1993 constitutional crisis and the 1996 presidential election. Secondly, the role of the mass media in the process of securitisation will be addressed. This section will specifically focus on Putin’s struggle against the oligarchs and the development of the ‘anti-terror’ discourse.
The ‘propaganda model’ will be used as the key analytical tool in assessing the importance of television in each process. There will be a difference in the emphasis of the filters that, as the relevance of each filter changes during each process. In democratisation there will be a specific focus on the first filter, “size, ownership and profit orientation of the mass media” (Herman and Chomsky, 2008, p. 2). In securitisation there will also be an emphasis of the first filter. There will also be a focus on the fourth filter, “flak and the enforcers” and the fifth filter, “anticommunism as a control mechanism” (Herman and Chomsky, 2008, pp. 17-27). Finally, this chapter will critically compare the role of the mass media in the transformation of the Russian state. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that television played a major role in supporting the political elite in both processes, whereas the print media has declined in significance. 

Democratisation:
	This section will examine the role of the mass media in the process of democratisation. To examine this process, it will answer the subsidiary research question ‘, what influence did the Russian mass media have during President Yeltsin’s terms in office and what key events altered the influence that the mass media had?’. The 1994-1996 Chechen conflict is a key event that is relevant to this section, which will be critically examined in the following chapter. 
To begin, Yeltsin had a policy agenda of market reform, democratisation and international integration with the West (Sakwa, 2005a, p. 6).The radical economic reforms began in January, 1992 (Aslund, 2007, p. 91). These policies were seen as “shock therapy”, a solution to the growing economic crisis (Aslund, 2007, p. 92). The growing economic crisis can be seen in figure 1 with the decrease of the Russian GDP [Gross Domestic Product] from 366.41 billion dollars in 1991 to 250.07 billion dollars in 1994. 
 
Figure 1: Extrapolate from the World Bank (2010). Date visualizer. Retrieved February 2, 2010, from http://devdata.worldbank.org/DataVisualizer/
	The market reforms resulted in the privatisation of the mass media, which caused the number of print media to decrease, as state subsidies were terminated and the economic crisis “threatened the survival of many of the most widely read newspapers” (Mickiewicz, 1995, pp. 159-160). The decrease in print media resulted in “the public’s dependence on television” for information, as it cost nothing to view (Mickiewicz, 1995, pp. 166-167). The continued dominance of television can be seen in the following: 
“A 2001 survey commissioned by the University of Glasgow found that about 80 per cent of Russians tune into television seven days a week and almost 70 per cent of them watch for at least two hours a day on weekends and even more on their days off. In addition, 57 per cent of them pick up a local paper several times a week and 36 per cent of them read a national news paper at the same rate” (Oates, 2005, pp. 120-121). 

The television channels, First Channel and Russian State Television, with the greatest reach over the Russian Federation, remained under the ownership of the state (Oates, 2005, p. 121). The rise of commercialised television is argued by Mickiewicz (1995, p. 163) to have “pierced the state monopoly and depending on where they lived, gave viewers some real options”. One of the major challenges to the state monopoly over television came from the company Media-Most, owned by Vladimir Gusinsky, which had its ‘flagship’ television channel NTV started in 1993 (Ryabov, 2004, p. 181). NTV was able to reach a majority of the population and had an important role in the first Chechen conflict (Oates, 2005, p. 122). The emerging pluralistic media is argued by Hall (2004, p. 145) to be an example of the ‘semi’ successful democratic consolidation of Russia. 
However, while there was some success in democratic consolidation with the rise of the pluralistic media, there were concerns with the overall success. For example, Parrott (1997, p. 6) argues that the Russian government has “made impressive progress in introducing competitive elections” but highlights a concern that the elite’s “loyalty to democratic principles remains highly questionable”. An important aspect affecting the success of democratic consolidation in Russia is argued by Fagin (1998, p. 143) to be the “uniquely complicated” situation of democratisation in Eastern European, as both major economic reform and democratisation have taken place simultaneously. Fagin (1998, pp. 143-145) highlights that before the collapse of the Soviet Union, the establishment of capitalism was seen as a necessary factor before democratisation could take place, which happened in Latin America and southern Europe.       
The extent of ‘semi’ successful democratic consolidation, particularly focusing on the mass media, will be examined in relation to the impact of the economic reforms. By 1993 the market reforms had become unpopular with the failure to bring economic stability (Nelson, & Kuzes, 1995, pp.127-129). Privatisation had created an extremely wealthy class known as the ‘oligarchs’ (Rutland, 2005, p. 188). The oligarchs had been created due to the lack of adequate controls over the privatisation of the large state owned industries (Goldman, 2004, pp. 124-125). In 1991, there was the introduction of a voucher system, where the population received fairly distributed shares in the economy (Bacon, 2010, p. 130; Kagarlitsky, 2002, p. 95). The shares were quickly bought up by a small group of entrepreneurs, due to the economic conditions leading to the majority of small shareholders to sell (Bacon, 2010, p. 130). The concentration of vouchers led to state industries being taken over at “almost free of cost” (Kagarlitsky, 2002, p. 95). 
There was further concentration of economic wealth with the “loans-for-shares” plan in 1995, where the remaining state owned industries were ‘leased’ to industrial groups in return for loans (Pirani, 2010, pp. 33-34). These where carried out through closed auctions with selected participants, excluding all foreign investors and unapproved Russians (Pirani, 2010, p. 34). The mass media was affected by the concentration of economic wealth,, as the oligarchs invested in the mass media to gain greater influence in politics to “produce economic payoff via government connections” (Ryabov, 2004, pp. 183-184). The oligarchs were able to use their political connections to gain ownership of state owned property at a fraction of its true value, such as the oligarch Berezovsky, who managed to gain “partial ownership and complete control of” First Channel (Oates, 2005, p 122; Ryabov, 2004, pp. 181-182; Sakwa, 2005a, p. 7). 
	The first filter is important, as ownership of the mass media was affected with the rise of the oligarchs. The first filter has been criticised by Boyd-Barrett (2004, pp. 447-448) who argues that this filter is in “many ways inseparable from the second filter”, “advertising revenue”, due to the first filter including “profit orientation”. However, this case study shows that the second filter, “advertising revenue” is not always connected with the first filter, because during democratisation the economic crisis had caused “limited consumer demand”, resulting in the media outlets being unable to rely on that source of funding (Ryabov, 2004, pp. 183-184). Instead, the mass media allied with Yeltsin’s government to gain access to government subsidies (Ryabov, 2004, p. 179). 
	The alliance with Yeltsin’s government can be seen in the 1993 constitutional crisis, where Yeltsin attempted to abolish the remaining political institutions from Soviet Russia and replace them with the current constitution. This process began in April, 1993 with a referendum that produced an ambiguous result under what Kagarlitsky (2002, p. 88) argues to have been “conducted under conditions of strict television censorship and featured a degree of manipulation of public opinion that was without precedent even in Soviet times”. By September, 1993, Ryabov (2004, p. 180) argues that television networks had given “their unconditional support to Yeltsin”. The failure of the referendum to gain a clear result led to Yeltsin ordering a direct attack against parliament, which resulted in tanks firing onto parliament where defenders of the constitution had barricaded themselves inside (Kagarlitsky, 2002, pp. 88-89). 
	The direct attack resulted in the surrender of the defenders and a second referendum was held in December, 1993 (Kagarlitsky, 2002, p. 89). The constitution required a 50 percent turn out to be valid (Bacon, 2010, p. 97). Kagarlitsky (2002, p. 89) highlights that the referendum was only successful due to massive electoral fraud, where the electoral commission overstated the turnout at 54.8 percent. An investigation discovered that only 46.1 per cent had voted meaning that the referendum was invalid (Kagarlitsky, 2002, p. 89).
	The new constitution had created a strong president who was far more authoritarian with a weakened parliament, which the president had the power to dissolve (Kagarlitsky, 2002, pp. 105-106). While aspects of the constitution had led to the adoption of partial authoritarianism, there was the liberal democratic principle of the ‘free media’ which had been enshrined in the new constitution under article 29, section 5 which states: “the freedom of the mass communication shall be guaranteed. Censorship shall be banned” (“Rights and freedoms of man and citizen”, 1993).  This constitution is an example of the argument made by Croissant and Merkel (2004, pp. 2-3) that countries do not always revert back to authoritarianism but adopt a combination of both democracy and authoritarianism. 
The support by the ‘free media’ during the constitutional crisis had led to the undermining of democratic consolidation with the undemocratic removal of the previous constitution. The support given for Yeltsin’s undemocratic actions was due to the oligarch’s support of the continuing economic reforms. The support of democratic reform was not in the interest of the elites, as economic interests took precedence. However, there was still critical coverage of government policies, Hall (2004, p. 145) highlights the first Chechen conflict and the success of its critical role, even risking Yeltsin’s chances of re-election. The risk to the outcome of the election had led to some of Yeltsin’s advisers to suggest that the 1996 elections should be cancelled due to the risk of neo-communists gaining power (Sakwa, 2005a, p. 6). The cancelling of elections was pushed after the neo-communist success in the Duma elections in December, 1995 (Lieven, 1998, p. 15). 
Nevertheless, democratisation was not reversed and Yeltsin won a second term in office. This second term was only achieved due to the support from the oligarchs, who gave their support in order to gain greater political power (Lieven, 1998, pp. 13-14). The success of Yeltsin’s campaign was only achieved by the manipulation of public opinion through the oligarch’s control of the mass media (Zassoursky, 2004, pp. 78-79). An example of this control is highlighted when Yeltsin suffered a heart attack during his re-election campaign and there was no television coverage of this incident to prevent Yeltsin appearing weak to the public (Oates, 2006, p. 64). The undermining of democracy through the concentration of ownership of the mass media also impacts mature democratic states. In the United States [US] during the presidential election in 1984, President Reagan won a ‘landslide’ victory, Chomsky (2002, pp. 30-33) argues that the majority were opposed to his policies, which included cuts to welfare and the increased funding to the military. 
The ‘landslide’ victory was achieved through a propaganda campaign to get voters to support an agenda that is harmful to them (Chomsky, 2002, pp. 30-31). These reforms to the domestic situation in the US resulted in an elite gaining massive amount of wealth, “between 1983 and 2004 the wealth of the top 1 percent increased by 77.8 percent, while that of the bottom 40 percent fell 58.7 percent” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 290). The mass media was used to protect the elite’s interests, as the increased wealth inequality has led to the growth in the concentration of media ownership and has allowed for elections to become dominated by the interests of the elite, through their financial support of electoral campaigns (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 290).  
The role of the media in the changing dominance from democratisation to securitisation will be examined in the next section.

Securitisation: 
	This section will examine the role of the mass media in securitisation’s dominance in the transition of the Russian state. To examine the role of the mass media, this section will seek to answer the subsidiary research question ‘to what extent has securitisation taken place within the Russian state under President Putin and what impact has it had on the mass media?’ There are three key events relevant to this section, which that shall be critically examined in the following chapter; the second Chechen conflict that began in 1999, including the apartment block blasts in September, 1999, and the presidential election in March, 2000. 
To begin, Putin’s success in achieving the position of president will be examined. Putin came to power in August, 1999 as prime minister, selected by Yeltsin as a favourable successor to stand in the March, 2000 presidential election (Sakwa, 2005a, p. 7). This transfer of power was supported through the use of a propaganda campaign by the oligarchs, who owned a large concentration of the mass media and had developed a much closer tie to the government since the support given in the 1996 presidential election (Blank, 2006, p. 146; Sakwa, 2005a, p. 7). Sakwa (2005a, p. 7) highlights that Yeltsin had serious concerns over his future security in a change of presidency, “with the possibility of sanctions being taken against him” and his ‘family’, also the possibility of the dismantlement of the political system he had developed. Yeltsin’s ‘family’ was a group made up of “a mix of Yeltsin family members, politicians and oligarchs” (Sakwa, 2005a, p. 7). 
One of the main issues that caused problems with Yeltsin selecting a successor was the economic crisis in 1998 with the collapse of the Ruble, as it caused the fracturing of the oligarchs which previously had been unified (Kagarlitsky, 2002, pp. 223-225). The selection of Putin as successor to Yeltsin is argued by Kotz and Weir (2007, p. 269) to be due to his independence from the oligarchs, which would not exacerbate the fracturing relations between them. There was also the dependency that Putin would have upon the oligarchs, due to their support bringing him to power in the March, 2000, presidential election (McFaul, 2005, p. 73; Pirani, 2010, p. 68).   
	The propaganda campaign depicted Putin as a strong leader. Including the use of television interviews showing him “talking tough” in the Chechen conflict frontline (Pirani, 2010, p. 68). The second Chechen conflict and the September apartment blasts were an important turning point for the Russian state. The second conflict began in August, 1999, and after the apartment blasts in September, there was successful securitisation of the conflict with popular support for the discourse of the ‘anti-terrorist operation’ (Bacon, Renz, & Cooper, 2006, p. 48). This strong image can be seen in Putin’s statement of retaliation for the apartment blasts, “vowing to act “harshly and rapidly”” (“Russia: Putin vows harsh action against Chechen rebels”, 1999, para 1). Colton and McFaul (2003, p. 13) argue that there was a view that democracy had been abandoned for security and highlights this poll: 
“A national poll of adult Russians conducted by the Center for the Study of Public Opinion (VTsIOM) in Moscow, in January 2000, found that 75 percent were in accord with a statement that order is more important than democracy and should be pursued even if it entails violations of democratic procedures and abridgements of personal freedom.”   

	The success of securitisation becoming the dominant process is due to the psychological effects of television news coverage, as it creates “conditions conducive to imagined forms of effective participation in the suffering of others” (Lorenzo-Dus, 2009, p.71). This also shapes the development of the audience’s belief in the interpretation of the events shown (Philo, 1990, p.7). Postman (1987, p. 80) argues that “television has achieved the status of “meta-medium” – an instrument that directs not only our knowledge of the world, but the ways of knowing as well”. 
	The role of television in supporting securitisation will be examined with a specific focus on the changing concentration of ownership in television, resulting from Putin’s struggle against the oligarchs. The struggle against the oligarchs began after Putin’s inauguration as president. Rutland (2005, p. 190) highlights that before his inauguration he was viewed as a “tool of the oligarchs”. After the inauguration, Putin took action against the oligarchs, such as Vladimir Gusinsky, the oligarch who owned the major television station NTV (Ambrosio, 2009, p.37). This action was framed as an action against a criminal who was undermining the ‘free media’ and the Russian state (Belin, 2004, p. 145). Gusinsky lost his ownership of ‘Media-Most’ including channel NTV, which was the only privately owned television station with a national reach and provided an “independent and balanced approach to the news” compared to the state owned television channels (Becker, 2004, p. 151; Belin, 2004, p. 139; Oates, 2005, p. 122).
	After Gusinsky was arrested under the charge of “fraud and tax offences”, he signed over control of ‘Media-Most’ to “Gazprom-Media, a Gazprom subsidiary” (Pirani, 2010, p. 70). Gazprom was part owned by the state, which had major influence over its running (Pirani, 2010, p. 19). Gusinsky was the first target of the struggle against the oligarchs, which Sakwa (2008a, pp. 144-148) highlights that Putin claimed the struggle was due to “real crimes and corruption”. Selected oligarchs were targeted who had “allegedly abused their dominance of the media” (Sakwa, 2008a, pp. 147-148). Putin’s actions against Gusinsky is argued by Ryabov (2004, p. 189) to be due to the critical coverage by NTV of the second Chechen conflict. 
	The changing ownership of the mass media has increased government control with NTV being owned by Gazprom, which has allowed Putin’s Government to prevent criticism of Government policy in Chechnya. The prevention of criticism was achieved with the restructuring of NTV by Gazprom, which removed the “director Yevgeny Kiselev, the station’s most prominent anchorman, and replaced him with the banker Boris Jordan (Pirani, 2010, pp. 70-71). Ultimately, the struggle against the oligarchs left Putin in a position of greatly influencing the selection of news reported. This influence was achieved with the change of ownership of NTV bringing government influence over the only independent television station with national reach, with both First Channel and the Russian State Television remaining under government ownership, and resulted in the formation of the dominant discourse of ‘anti terrorism’.  
	The dominance of ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse resulted in a rise of “racist hysteria” and the creation of an ‘enemy’ image given to individuals from the North Caucasus (Zassoursky, 2004, p. 124). The ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse has been used to frame the second Chechen conflict as an ‘anti-terrorist operation’ against the threat of “global Islamic jihad”, with the North Caucasus being presented as a frontline in this global conflict (Souleimanov, & Ditrych, 2008, p. 1201). Murray Edelman (1988) argues that the creation of the ‘enemy’ is important “to weaken internal opposition and distract the attention of the public from domestic problems” (Zassoursky, 2004, p. 125). 
	The ‘anti-terrorist’ discourse is a level of ideological control, framing the reporting of events by the media and getting the population to mobilise themselves against an unclear ‘enemy’. This highlights the importance of the fifth filter of the ‘propaganda model’ in understanding the impact of ideological control on the mass media (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 27-29). The fifth filter, ‘anti-communism’, has been criticised by Goodwin (1994, pp. 107-109) to highlight the ‘propaganda model’ as a US centric approach and questions the usefulness outside of the US. However, the fifth filter is relevant in explaining the successful securitisation, with the current ideological control mechanism being the ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse. The success of this discourse perpetuated by the media has created ideological constraints effects on its critical capacity.
 	Critical content has been undermined with the influence of the fourth filter, “flak and the enforcers”, where the potential threat of legal action can deter a news outlet from reporting certain information (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 24-25). The threat of legal action can be seen in the Federal Law on the Counteraction of Extremist Activity 114-FZ July 25, 2002, in article 8, which created the legal process to stop media outlets “spreading extremist materials”. This law includes the shutting down of media outlets that fail to comply with the law. This included a broad definition of what is covered by “extremist materials” in article 1. 
	Critical capacity was undermined further with the risks to individual journalists, as the current situation is highlighted by Aliev and Tait (2008, p. 144) as “a journalist is forced to choose between enjoying an easy life” or “finding himself or herself a pariah from the journalistic community, persecuted, at the instigation of the authorities, by his own colleagues”. There was not only financial penalties, but also the risk to their personal safety, which is argued by Ambrosio (2009, p. 37) to be the “mysterious and unsolved deaths of those reporters critical of the government”. Since 1999, “the Committee to Protect Journalists” has claimed that “24 reporters had been killed in Russia” (Freedom House, 2010, para 4). One of these journalists was Anna Politkovskaya who was murdered in October, 2006 (Aliev, & Tait, 2008, p. 141). Politkovskaya had been a critic of the Chechen conflicts and her death is argued by Aliev and Tait (2008, pp. 141-142) to be “a deadly warning” to journalists “not to present Chechnya in the colours used by Anna Politkovskaya”. These threats resulted in the rise of self censorship. The mass media is argued by Ryabov (2004, p. 194) to have taken on a role similar to its previous role in the Soviet Union, as the state’s ‘propaganda apparatus’. 	
  	   	
Conclusion:
In conclusion, television was a major role in supporting the elite in both processes of transformation. In democratisation, the economic reforms created the oligarchs, who invested in television to gain political influence. During the 1993 constitutional crisis, television had given their full support for Yeltsin and his undemocratic actions in the creation of a new constitution, undermining democratic consolidation. The political system that emerged through the new constitution had centralised power in the president. However, while there was some undermining of the democratic reforms, the pluralistic media that had arisen in Russia and did result in critical coverage of the first Chechen conflict. Nevertheless, the success of the critical coverage resulted in a risk to Yeltsin’s re-election campaign in 1996. Democratic consolidation was further undermined through the manipulation of the electorate in the 1996 election by the oligarch’s propaganda campaign, to avoid the resurgence of communism and to protect their economic interests.    
The political transformation changed with securitisation becoming dominant. The television played a major role in this process and supporting the elites. However, the elites that it supported changed, as Putin’s struggle against the oligarchs resulted in the removal of some of the oligrachs close to Yeltsin, such as Gusinsky, and a change of ownership in television, with NTV becoming under the control of Gazprom. The changing concentration of ownership and influence that the state has over television was a key role in securitisation with the marginalising of criticism of government policies, including the formation of ideological constraints with the ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse. The ‘anti-terror’ discourse used the fear created by terrorist attacks to create public support for securitisation. This fear is due to the dependence of the population on television, which has the potential to intensify people’s fear of a threat. This fear in turn has created greater support for the securitisation discourse. The further silencing of criticism has come from the state implementing legal threats to media outlets and journalists, including threats to journalist’s careers and personal safety, resulting in self censorship. 
Overall, television was a key role in both processes of the transformation of Russian state. Role of television coverage in the Chechen conflicts will be critically examined in the following chapter.             
Chapter 4: The role of the mass media in the Chechen conflicts
This chapter will critically examine the role of the mass media, specifically television, in each of the Chechen conflicts and will contrast the consequences. The aim of this chapter is to answer the subsidiary research question “what impact did television have in the outcomes of the Chechen conflicts?”. The chapter will be split into two sections. Firstly, the role of the mass media in the first Chechen conflict, 1994 to 1996 and its consequences will be analysed. Secondly, a critical examination of the second Chechen conflict, 1999 to 2009, will be carried out. The third filter of the ‘propaganda model’, “sourcing”, will be used to examine these conflicts, as the differences in the coverage will be argued to be due to the changing nature of the Chechen resistance and its impact on the sourcing for the media. The first section will argue that the critical coverage during the first Chechen conflict was due to the unified resistance providing an alternative news source for the mass media, so they did not fall into an ‘official line’. The second section will argue that the lack of critical coverage during the second Chechen conflict was due to the fracturing of the Chechen resistance and therefore, the loss of the alternative news source.
      
First Chechen conflict:
The first Chechen conflict was argued by Hall (2004, p. 145) to be an example of the ‘semi’ successful democratic consolidation, due to the critical role the media played in the conflict. The extent of the critical coverage is described as a ‘historic episode’ by Grabelnikov (1996) who argued that it was “one of the rare cases in the history of journalism when the national mass media spoke out on the side of the enemy at a time of war” (Zassoursky, 2004, p. 60). Television is highlighted by Oates (2005, p. 122) to have produced critical coverage, due to the role of the NTV television channel. NTV provided highly critical coverage with the “refusal to report only the official government line of easy victories and grateful Chechens” (Oates, 2005, p. 122). The critical coverage of the conflict resulted in producing the opposite effects that Yeltsin desired. Yeltsin had wished to rebuild his image as a strong leader and maintain the stability of the Russian Federation (Ryabov, 2004, p. 180). 
Critical television coverage had led to the failure to gain popular support for the military action in Chechnya and Trenin, Malashenko and Lieven (2004, pp. 49-50) highlights a poll conducted in the end of 1995 showing “only 3.2 percent of the Russian public advocated continued military action, while 51.1 percent demanded troop withdrawal”. NTV was an important role in producing an overall critical coverage, as it was able to “reach about 75 per cent of the Russian public by making use of arrangements with local stations” (Oates, 2005, p. 122). Oates (2005, p. 122) argues that it resulted in a “less sanitized coverage of the war” by other private media and the state owned media.
The impact of critical coverage of defeats, “Russian casualties, and human rights abuses by Russian troops”, caused a major drop in support (Gerber and Mendelson, 2008, p. 43). Another aspect of the conflict was highlighted by Human Rights Watch (1995, para. 1), which reported on Russian forces attacking civilian targets: 
“In the early weeks of the war, Russian bombs and artillery fire laid waste to Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, and outlying villages, destroying apartment buildings, hospitals, and other civilian objects, and killing, maiming, or injuring thousands of civilians.”
 
The drop of popular support can lead to the failure of a war. An example can be seen in Vietnam War, where in 1968; the Tet offensive resulted in intense coverage on US television and created a surge of support for the antiwar movement (Rid, 2007, pp. 58-59). The Tet offensive was an attack on the South Vietnamese cities by the Vietcong. However, the importance of this attack was that it provided the “most dramatic television coverage of the war” (Culbert, 1998, pp. 421-422). Rid (2007, pp. 59-60) argues that the military hold the perspective that the ‘major battles’ were a success, but it had been the media that caused the failure of the war. The public had seen that both the government and the military, had failed to “live up to its official optimism and promises” (Rid, 2007, pp. 59-60). The importance of popular support is argued by Carruthers (2000, p. 5) to be an important aspect of war and the mass media has an important role “to persuade citizens of a war’s justness”. 
However, Kagarlitsky (2002, pp. 116-117) argues that the Russian failure in the conflict was due to a series of ‘catastrophic defeats’ that led to the rise of an antiwar mood. This mood resulted in Yeltsin becoming very unpopular. His re-election campaign became severely threatened by the unpopularity of the conflict (Trenin, Malashenko, & Lieven, 2004, p. 27). The success of his re-election was only through manipulation of public opinion by the oligarch’s control of the media (Zassoursky, 2004, pp. 78-79). One of the main reasons that the critique of government actions was successful was due to the popular uprising against the Russian intervention in Chechnya under the command of Dudaev (Kipp, 2003, pp. 183-185). This was due to the popular and cohesive resistance to the Russians, which allowed for journalists to gain a safe passage into Chechnya to interview Chechen resistance leaders. Journalists had the opportunity to interview the resistance fighters, which further strengthened the undermining of Yeltsin’s government (Oates, 2005, pp. 122-123). 
The critical coverage had successfully undermined the support for the first conflict (Zassoursky, 2004, pp. 58-59). The first conflict came to an end in August 31, 1996, with the signing of the ‘Khasavyurt agreement’ (Gakaev, 2005, p. 29). This deal gave “some autonomy to the Chechens”; nevertheless it did not grant independence (Bacon, 2010, p. 52). However, by 1999, the Russian army had been deployed in the second Chechen conflict. 
       
Second Chechen conflict:
	This section will critically examine the changing role of television. There are three key events that will be examined: firstly, the apartment block blasts in September, 1999; secondly, the presidential election in March, 2000; and finally, the role of television in the success of the ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse. Initially this section will examine the interwar period and the causes of the second Chechen conflict.   
	During the interwar period there were terrorist attacks against civilian targets by a small group of Chechen separatists to get the Russian people to pressure their government, so the Chechen demand for independence would be addressed (McCartan, Masselli, Rey, & Rusnak, 2008, pp. 61-62). The media had an important role in the use of terrorism, as “through a violent act, massive media attention is garnered, which is an effective method of advertising a cause when other legitimate avenues seem to be of little use” (McCartan, Masselli, Rey, & Rusnak, 2008, p. 61). Eventually, these attacks focused away from the Chechen territory and led to the breakdown of Russian-Chechen relations (Kipp, 2003, p. 179). 
	The interwar period came to an end after a group of radical Islamic Chechen resistance fighters crossed into Dagestan in August, 1999. The Russian government responded with a renewed conflict in Chechnya (Kipp, 2003, p. 179). A major aspect of the second conflict was that it covered not only Chechnya, but was extended to the whole of North Caucasus (Trenin, Malashenko, & Lieven, 2004, p. 64). The Chechen fighters who travelled into Dagestan were argued to be ‘suicidal’ by Zassoursky (2004, p. 122), as they did not find the local support they expected. The negative public reaction is highlighted in the following poll: 
“Of 1,600 Russian citizens polled by the public-opinion research organisation VCIOM, 52 percent called for the fighters to be wiped out one way or another, although only 10 percent insisted on the destruction of the fighters’ bases in Chechnya” (Zassoursky, 2004, p. 122).

The successful securitisation of the conflict took place after the apartment blasts in September, 1999, which resulted in the deaths of “round 300 citizens” (Bacon, Renz, & Cooper, 2006, p. 48). The apartment blasts were blamed on Chechen terrorists (Ware, 2005, p. 599). The conflict in Chechnya is argued by Zassoursky (2004, p. 123) to have provided an opportunity for the reform of the political system. The opportunity to reform was achieved through the apartment blasts creating popular support for their ‘anti-terror’ operation in Chechnya (Kipp, 2003, p. 191). 
An important aspect in the blame of the Chechens for the apartment blasts, was that no Chechen leader claimed responsibility (Ware, 2005, pp. 599-600). There are questions hanging over the bombing of the apartments, with evidence to suggest that the Federal Security Service [FSB] had carried out the bombing, as the FSB agents were caught placing ‘sacks of explosives’ in an apartment building basement in Ryazan (Pirani, 2010, pp. 112-113). The FSB claimed that it had been a ‘training exercise’ and the sacks were removed and destroyed (Pirani, 2010, pp. 112-113). Some of the other questions hanging over the incident are highlighted by Ware (2005, p. 600): 
“Indeed why would any Chechen wish to enrage Russians by attacking civilians in their beds? And why did the explosions stop when Russian troops reentered Chechnya? If Chechens were behind the blasts then wouldn’t the blasts have continued after warfare resumed?” 

	No matter what took place during the bombings, the timing was highly significant, as it created popular support for the conflict and support for Putin’s centralisation of power (Pirani, 2010, p. 113). The support that Putin received is evident in the presidential election in March, 2000, where Putin achieved a result of 52.94 percent (Sakwa, 2008a, pp. 32). The electoral support is argued by Sakwa (2008a, p. 34) to have been from a broad support base rather than being solely down to the second Chechen conflict, although the conflict did create a growth of support. 
	The electoral result was affected by the key factor of television (Zassoursky, 2004, pp. 127-128). The two main reasons that television became a key factor is argued by Zassoursky (2004, 127-128) to be due to a new law limiting “the rights of journalists to make commentaries while covering the campaign” and the television coverage that each presidential candidate received. Zassoursky (2004, pp. 127-128) highlights a study by the ‘European Media Institute’ which found a similarity between the number of television appearances and votes received. Putin received the dominant coverage with “48%” of all television coverage of the election and the election resulted with “52.9%” of the votes (Zassoursky, 2004, p. 128).
	There was also Putin’s rhetoric to explain the electoral result.The rhetoric used by Putin to increase support for the Chechen conflict was the image that it was “part of a wider problem of global terrorism”, rather than a nationalist movement (Remington, 2009, p. 221). This rhetoric gained further strength after the 9/11 attacks in the US in 2001 and the US led ‘war on terror’ (Snetkov, 2007, p. 1351). Through the use of this rhetoric, Putin has been able to centralise power over ‘law enforcement structures’ from regional government (Baev, 2003, p. 36). However, while the enforcement structures have been centralised, there has also been a fundamental shift in the political elite resulting in an increased number coming being from military and security backgrounds (Shlykov, 2004, pp. 121-122). 
	The success of the rhetoric can be attributed to the lack of critical coverage, in part due to the changing ownership of television. Another contributing factor of the lack of critical coverage was the legal limitations placed on the reporting, during the second Chechen conflict, to stop the undermining of public support for the military action that took place in the first conflict (Weiler, 2004, p. 114). An example of the direct limitations on reporting was the introduction of a system of ‘special accreditation’ for journalists to be able to report from Chechnya (Aliev, & Tait, 2008, p. 142). The system of ‘special accreditation’ meant that journalists who published critical material could be deported and refused future entry into Chechnya (Aliev, & Tait, 2008, p. 142). This system of accreditation is an example of the fourth filter, “flak and the enforcers”, where Putin’s Government is producing flak “to contain any deviations from the established line” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, p. 27).     
	However, a major cause of the success of the rhetoric is due to the third filter, “sourcing”. An important contrast between the first and second conflicts was that the resistance was unified during the first conflict, while during the second conflict there was the fracturing of the Chechen resistance with “a historically unprecedented level of inter-Chechen violence” (Moore, & Tumelty, 2009, pp. 85-86). The fracturing of the Chechen resistance has led to the loss of a reliable regular news source from the Chechen point of view, as the ability for journalists to gain safe passage in Chechnya is no longer guaranteed (Oates, 2005, p. 123).
	There was an element of truth to the rhetoric of radical Islam used by the Government and unchallenged by the media with its dependency on official government sources after the fracturing of the Chechen resistance. This fracturing was due to Islamic radicalisation within Chechen. The rise of radical Islam in Chechnya is argued by Hertog (2005, pp. 249-250) to have begun during the first Chechen conflict when “rival groups with diverging interests applied the Islamic discourse extensively in their quest for power and legitimacy”. However, radicalisation began to take place during the interwar period, with the ‘socioeconomic situation’ leading to the opening of the region to an influence from radical Islamic organisations. An example was the funding by the Islamic educational institutions filling “the educational void in Chechnya’s devastated society” (Hertog, 2005, p. 250; Moore, & Tumelty, 2008, p. 425).
	There has even been the presence of foreign fighters in Chechnya, which Moore and Tumelty (2008, p. 427) argue that just their presence in the region had a profound effect by allowing the Putin administration to successfully portray the conflict as part of the global ‘war on terror’. The presence of foreign fighters was limited within Chechnya, as the Chechen resistance was hostile to them for two reasons; firstly the extra man power was not needed at the beginning of the conflict, and secondly the hazardous terrain led to the foreign fighters having a tendency to be captured or killed by the Russian forces (Moore, & Tumelty, 2008, pp. 421-422).
	Another key aspect of the radicalisation was the development of Chechen suicide bombers, with the first attack in June 7, 2000, where two women drove a truck of explosives into a building being used as a temporary headquarters for the ‘Russian Special Forces’ (Speckhard, & Ahkmedova, 2005, p. 429).There was a lack of public support for the suicide bombing, as it led to the death of innocent Chechens and helped further fracture the Chechen resistance (Speckhard, & Ahkmedova, 2005, p. 441). This also has had the result of strengthening the rhetoric of the ‘anti-terror discourse’, as suicide bombers had strengthened the image of the Chechen resistance being part of global terrorism (Snetkov, 2007, p. 1353). Putin had been able to take advantage of the fracturing of Chechen resistance with the backing of the secularists and giving “a greater degree of political and fiscal autonomy for the Chechen people”, allowing for the formation of a pro-Moscow regional Government (Moore, & Tumelty, 2009, pp. 85-86). This pro-Moscow regional Government has resulted in an increase of the inter-Chechen conflict and successfully undermined the movement for independence (Moore, & Tumelty, 2009, pp. 85-86). 	 

Conclusion:
	In conclusion, television had a key role in both conflicts. However, television had a contradictory role. In the first conflict it undermined popular support, even being blamed for the failure of the conflict with the critical coverage of Russian defeats, and in the second conflict it had a key role in creating and maintaining public support. This major difference can be explained using the third filter of the propaganda model, “sourcing”, and the changing Chechen resistance in each conflict. During the first conflict the united Chechen resistance created a reliable source of raw news for television and allowed journalists to interview resistance leaders in relative safety, as they could gain safe passage through the region. However, by the second conflict there had been fracturing within the Chechen resistance. The fracturing of the united resistance led to the collapse of the alternative source for raw news and resulted in television falling into a ‘special agenda’ with the reliance on government sources.  
Chapter 5: Conclusion
	In conclusion, television has had a key role in the transformation of the Russian state. Even in its emergence from the collapse of the Soviet Union, where television had an important role within the collapse. The impact of television was limited until Glasnost and even then, not until the broadening of Glasnost after the Chernobyl disaster, resulting the rise of the nationalist movements. The nationalist movements were able to gain power due to the democratisation reforms and resulted in the collapse of the Soviet Union. Therefore, the first consequential hypothesis ‘the Glasnost reform of the Soviet mass media was a key factor in the collapse of the Soviet Union and a key aspect in understanding the resulting role of the media in the emerging Russian state’, can be accepted. The broadening of Glasnost was an important factor in the role of the media in the emergence of the Russian state, as it began the breakdown of formal censorship.
	The breakdown of formal censorship was an important aspect of the process of democratisation, while the ownership of the television channels of First Channel and Russian State Television remained under the control of the state. There was the rise of a pluralistic media and especially important was the creation of NTV in 1993, which pierced the state owned monopoly. The television achieved dominance with the decrease of print media, due to the economic reforms and the end of government subsidies. There was ‘semi’ successful democratic consolidation with the rise of the pluralistic media, resulting in the media playing an important critical role in the first Chechen conflict. However, democratic consolidation was undermined with the creation of the oligarchs through the economic reforms, who invested in the mass media to gain political influence to get access to economic opportunities. This influence over the media resulted in the undermining of democratic consolidation with their support of Yeltsin in the 1993 ‘constitutional crisis’ and the manipulation of the electorate during Yeltsin’s re-election campaign in 1996. The second consequential hypothesis, ‘the genesis of the ‘free media’ was a contributing factor in the initial success, however, it eventually undermined the process democratisation’, can be accepted.  .
The ownership of television was an important aspect in the process of securitisation achieving dominance. The ownership of television became under greater state control during Putin’s struggle against the oligarchs, with Gusinsky losing ownership over Media-Most to Gazprom. The changing ownership has allowed for the securitisation to become the dominant process and successfully undermined democratisation. Through the changing ownership of the television medium, there was the successful use of ideological constraints with the ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse. The ‘anti-terrorism’ discourse created the threat from an ‘enemy’, which created fear in the public. Resulting in pressure for further securitisation and support for government policies the in limiting the freedom of the press. This discourse was strengthened with the anti-terror laws providing legal consequences to the media outlets, including threats to individual journalists, creating a situation of self-censorship. The third consequential hypothesis, ‘securitisation has become the dominant process in the transformation through the use of television, resulting in the further securitisation of the mass media’, can be accepted. 
The Chechen conflicts reflect the dominant process in the transformation. The role of the media during the first Chechen conflict, which took place while the process of democratisation was dominant, resulted in the undermining popular support, due to the critical coverage of Russian defeats. During the process securitisation it had a contradictory role of maintaining public support for the second Chechen conflict. The major differences in the reporting of the Chechen conflicts were due to two reasons. Firstly, the fracturing of the Chechen resistance bringing an end to the reliable alternative source of news and resulted in the media falling into a ‘special agenda’ with the reliance on government sources. Secondly, the changing ownership, placed a greater government influence over the television. Finally, the forth consequential hypothesis ‘the role of television in the Chechen conflicts is an important factor in explaining the outcomes of each of the conflicts’ can be accepted. 
Overall, television has been a key factor in the political transformation of the Russian state. The television was an important factor in the emergence of the Russian state, due to the role television had in the collapse of the Soviet Union. The role of the mass media has changed in each process of the transformation.  The research hypothesis, ‘television has been a key factor in political transformation of contemporary Russian politics, but has remained under the control of political elites throughout the transformation of the state’, can be accepted. However, while this dissertation has shown that the mass media, specifically television, has been a key factor of the political transformation of the Russian state, there is the possibility for extensive research on the impact of the mass media in political transformation.
For example, this study is limited by the focus on the Russian state, as Russia may be a unique example. A possibility for further research would be a comparative analysis between other transitions that took place in Eastern Europe, as then both the political and economic reforms would be common factors. There is also the opportunity to examine if the role of the media was solely important in the Eastern Europe transformations by comparing differing case studies from different regions. An example could be a comparative analysis between the role of the media in democratisation of Chile, South Africa and Russia. Another potential for further research would be a primary data analysis of media output during the transition. There is also the possibility of refocusing the research on the ‘electronic media’ to examine the impact of the internet in political transitions. A possible example could be the recent political change in Egypt and the role of internet during the transition, with a specific focus on the ‘social media sites’, which gave the opportunity for political organisations to organise protests against the Egyptian government (Alexander, 2011, para 1-4).     
