Friends, thank you so much for that incredible welcome and Rohi, thank you so much for that incredible welcome. Rohi, thank you so much for the way you introduced me and the way our family and you have contributed so much to our community. That was absolutely brilliant. Thank you very much.

 

I am truly delighted to be invited to make this speech today, because for the past two weeks, as you’ve probably known I’ve had a very easy, relaxing time. Hardly anything of any importance at all has happened to me.

 

You might have noticed in some of our newspapers they’ve taken a bit of an interest in me lately.

 

Some of the things I’ve read are this. According to one headline “Jeremy Corbyn welcomed the prospect of an asteroid ‘wiping out’ humanity.”

 

Now, asteroids are pretty controversial. It’s not the kind of policy I’d want this party to adopt without a full debate in conference. So can we have the debate later in the week!

 

Another newspaper went even further and printed a ‘mini-novel’ that predicted how life would look if I were Prime Minister. It’s pretty scary I have to tell you.

 

It tells us football’s Premier League would collapse, which makes sense, because it’s quite difficult to see how all our brilliant top 20 teams in the Premiership would cope with playing after an asteroid had wiped out humanity. So that’s a no-no for sure!

 

And then the Daily Express informed readers that – I’m not quite sure how many greats there are here, but I think there are three or four - great-great-great grandfather, who I’d never heard of before was a very unpleasant sort of chap who apparently was involved in running a workhouse. I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time to have a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.

 

But then there’s another journalist who had obviously been hanging around my street a great deal, who quotes: “Neighbours often see him riding a Chairman Mao style bicycle.” Less thorough journalists might just have referred to it as just a ‘bicycle’, but no.

 

So we have to conclude that whenever we see someone on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao. Thus, the Daily Express has changed history.

 

But seriously Conference it’s a huge honour and a privilege for me to speak to you today as Leader of the Labour Party.

 

To welcome all our new members.

 

More than 160,000 have joined the Labour party.

 

And more than 50,000 have joined since the declaration of the leadership and deputy leadership election results.

 

I’m very proud to say that in my own constituency, our membership as of last night had just gone over 3,000 individual members and 2,000 registered supporters. 5,000 people in my constituency.

 

I want to say first of all thank you to all of the people of my constituency of Islington North and Islington North Labour party for their friendship, support and all the activities we’ve done and all the help and support they’ve given me in the past few weeks. I’m truly grateful to you. Thank you very much indeed to everyone in Islington.

 

Above I want to welcome all our new members to this party, everyone who’s joined this party in this great endeavour. To change our party, change our country, change our politics and change the way we do things. Above all I want to speak to everyone in Britain about the tasks Labour has now turned to.

 

Opposing and fighting the Tory government and the huge damage it is doing.

 

Developing Labour’s alternative.

 

Renewing our policies so we can reach out across the country and win.

 

Starting next year.

 

In Wales.

 

In Scotland.

 

In London.

 

In Bristol.

 

In local government elections across Britain.

 

I want to repeat the thanks I gave after my election to all the people who have served the Labour Party so well in recent months and years.

 

To Ed Miliband for the leadership he gave our party, and for the courage and dignity he showed in the face of tawdry media attacks.

 

And also for the contribution I know he will be making in the future.

 

Especially on the vital issues of the environment and climate change.

 

Thank you Ed. Thank you so much for all you’ve done.

 

And to Harriet Harman not just for her leadership and service, but for her commitment and passion for equality and the rights of women.

 

The way she has changed attitudes and law through her courage and determination. The Equality Act is one of many testaments to her huge achievements. Thank you, Harriet, for everything you’ve done and everything you continue to do.

 

I also want to say a big thank you to Iain McNicol, our General Secretary, and all our Party staff in London and Newcastle and all over the country for their dedication and hard work during the General Election and leadership election campaigns.

 

And also to all the staff and volunteers who are doing such a great job here this week in Brighton at this incredible conference we’re holding. Thank you to all of them. They’re part of our movement and part of our conference.

 

Also I want to say a special thank you to the fellow candidates who contested the leadership election for this party.

 

It was an amazing three month experience for all of us.

 

I want to say thank you to Liz Kendall, for her passion, her independence, determination and her great personal friendship to me throughout the campaign. Liz, thank you so much for that and all you contribute to the party.

 

I want to say thank you to Yvette Cooper for the remarkable way in which she’s helped to change public attitudes towards the refugee crisis.

 

And now for leading a taskforce on how Britain and Europe can do more to respond to this crisis. Yvette, thank you for that.

 

And to Andy Burnham, our new Shadow Home Secretary, for everything he did as Health Secretary to defend our NHS – health service free at the point if use as a human right for all.

 

I want to say thank you to all three for the spirit and friendship with which they contested the election.

 

Thank you Liz.

 

Thank you Yvette.

 

Thank you Andy.

 

I want to thank all those who took part in that election, at hustings and rallies all across the country. Our Party at its best, democratic, inclusive and growing.

 

I’ve got new people to thank as well.

 

The talented colleagues working with me in the Shadow Cabinet and on Labour’s front bench.

 

An inclusive team from all political wings of our Party.

 

From every part of our country.

 

It gives us the right foundation for the open debate our Party must now have about the future.

 

I am not leader who wants to impose leadership lines all the time.

 

I don’t believe anyone of us has a monopoly on wisdom and ideas - we all have ideas and a vision of how things can be better.

 

I want open debate in our party and our movement.

 

I will listen to everyone.

 

I firmly believe leadership is about listening.

 

We will reach out to our new members and supporters.

 

Involve people in our debates on policy and then our Party as a whole will decide.

 

I’ve been given a huge mandate, by 59 per cent of the electorate who supported my campaign. I believe it is a mandate for change.

 

I want to explain how.

 

First and foremost it’s a vote for change in the way we do politics.

 

In the Labour Party and in the country.

 

Politics that’s kinder, more inclusive.

 

Bottom up, not top down.

 

In every community and workplace, not just in Westminster.

 

Real debate, not necessarily message discipline all the time.

 

But above all, straight talking. Honest.

 

That’s the politics we’re going to have in the future in this party and in this movement.

 

And it was a vote for political change in our party as well.

 

Let me be clear under my leadership, and we discussed this yesterday in conference, Labour will be challenging austerity.

 

It will be unapologetic about reforming our economy to challenge inequality and protect workers better.

 

And internationally Labour will be a voice for engagement in partnership with those who share our values.

 

Supporting the authority of international law and international institutions, not acting against them.

 

The global environment is in peril.

 

We need to be part of an international movement to cut emissions and pollution.

 

To combat the environmental danger to our planet.

 

These are crucial issues. But I also want to add this.

 

I’ve been standing up for human rights, challenging oppressive regimes for 30 years as a backbench MP.

 

And before that as an individual activist, just like everyone else in this hall.

 

Just because I’ve become the leader of this party, I’m not going to stop standing up on those issues or being that activist.

 

So for my first message to David Cameron, I say to him now a little message from our conference, I hope he’s listening – you never know:

 

Intervene now personally with the Saudi Arabian regime to stop the beheading and crucifixion of Ali Mohammed al-Nimr, who is threatened with the death penalty, for taking part in a demonstration at the age of 17.

 

And while you’re about it, terminate that bid made by our Ministry of Justice’s to provide services for Saudi Arabia - which would be required to carry out the sentence that would be put down on Mohammed Ali al-Nimr.

 

We have to be very clear about what we stand for in human rights.

 

A refusal to stand up is the kind of thing that really damages Britain’s standing in the world.

 

I have huge admiration for human rights defenders all over the world. I’ve met hundreds of these very brave people during my lifetime working on international issues. I want to say a special mention to one group who’ve campaigned for the release of British resident Shaker Aamer from Guantanamo Bay.

 

This was a campaign of ordinary people like you and me, standing on cold draughty streets, for many hours over many years.

 

Together we secured this particular piece of justice.

 

That’s how our human rights were won by ordinary people coming together. Ordinary people doing extraordinary things – that is how our rights and our human rights have been won.

 

The Tories want to repeal the Human Rights Act and some want leave the European convention on Human Rights.

 

Just to show what they’re made of, their new Trade Union Bill which we’re opposing very strongly in the House and the country, is also a fundamental attack on human rights and is in breach of both the ILO and the European Convention on Human Rights.

 

Now I’ve been listening to a lot of advice about how to do this job.

 

There’s plenty of advice around, believe me.

 

Actually I quite like that. I welcome that.

 

I like to listen to advice, particularly the advice which is unwelcome. That is often the best advice you get. The people that tell you, “yes, you’re doing great, you’re brilliant, you’re wonderful”. Fine. Thank you, but what have I got wrong? “Oh, I haven’t got time for that.”

 

I want to listen to people.

 

But I do like to do things differently as well.

 

I’ve been told never to repeat your opponents’ lines in a political debate.

 

But I want to tackle one thing head on.

 

The Tories talk about economic and family security being at risk from us the Labour party, or perhaps even more particularly, from me.

 

I say this to them. How dare these people talk about security for families and people in Britain?

 

Where’s the security for families shuttled around the private rented sector on six month tenancies - with children endlessly having to change schools?

 

Where’s the security for those tenants afraid to ask a landlord to fix a dangerous structure in their own homes because they might be evicted because they’ve gone to the local authority to seek the justice they’re entitled to?

 

Where’s the security for the carers struggling to support older family members as Tory local government cuts destroy social care and take away the help they need?

 

Where’s the security for young people starting out on careers knowing they are locked out of any prospect of ever buying their own home by soaring house prices?

 

Where’s the security for families driven away from their children’s schools, their community and family ties by these welfare cuts?

 

Where’s the security for the hundreds of thousands taking on self-employment with uncertain income, no sick pay, no Maternity Pay, no paid leave, no pension now facing the loss of the tax credits that keep them and their families afloat?

 

And there’s no security for the 2.8 million households in Britain forced into debt by stagnating wages and the Tory record of the longest fall in living standards since records began.

 

And that’s the nub of it.

 

Tory economic failure.

 

An economy that works for the few, not for the many.

 

Manufacturing still in decline.

 

Look at the Tory failure to intervene to support our steel industry as the Italian government has done.

 

So, as we did yesterday in conference, we stand with the people on Teesside fighting for their jobs, their industry and their community. The company has said that it will mothball the plant and lay the workers off, therefore it is not too late now, again, to call on the Prime Minister even at this late stage, this 12th hour, to step in and defend those people, like the Italian government has done. Why can’t the British government? What is wrong with them?

 

There’s an investment crisis.

 

Britain at the bottom of the international league on investment.

 

Just below Madagascar and just above El Salvador. So we’re doing quite well!

 

Britain’s balance of payment deficit £100 billion last year.

 

Loading our economy and every one of us with unsustainable debt for the future.

 

And the shocks in world markets this summer have shown what a dangerous and fragile state the world economy is in.

 

And how ill prepared the Tories have left us to face another crisis.

 

It hasn’t been growing exports and a stronger manufacturing sector that have underpinned the feeble economic recovery.

 

It’s house price inflation, asset inflation, more private debt.

 

Unbalanced.

 

Unsustainable.

 

Dangerous.

 

The real risk to economic and family security.

 

To people who have had to stretch to take on mortgages.

 

To people who have only kept their families afloat through relying on their credit cards, and payday loans.

 

Fearful of how they will cope with a rise in interest rates.

 

It’s not acceptable.

 

The Tories’ austerity is the out-dated and failed approach of the past.

 

So it’s for us, for Labour to develop our forward-looking alternative.

 

That’s what John McDonnell started to do in his excellent speech to conference.

 

At the heart of it is investing for the future.

 

Every mainstream economist will tell you that with interest rates so low now is the time for public investment in our infrastructure.

 

Investment in council housing, and for affordable homes to rent and to buy.

 

John Healey’s plan for 100,000 new council and housing association homes a year.

 

To tackle the housing crisis, drive down the spiralling housing benefit bill and so to make the taxpayer a profit. A profit for the taxpayer because the benefit bill falls when the cost of housing falls. It’s quite simple actually and quite a good idea.

 

Investment in fast broadband to support new high technology jobs.

 

A National Investment Bank to support investment in infrastructure.

 

To provide finance to small and medium sized firms that our banks continue to starve of the money they need to grow.

 

A Green New Deal investing in renewable energy and energy conservation to tackle the threat of climate change.

 

The Tories of course are selling off the Green Investment Bank. They are simply not interested in this.

 

This is the only way to a strong economic future for Britain.

 

That’s sustainable.

 

That turns round the terrible trade deficit.

 

That supports high growth firms and businesses.

 

That provides real economic security for our people.

 

The economy of the future depends on the investment we make today in infrastructure, skills, and schools.

 

I’m delighted that Lucy Powell is our new shadow Education Secretary.

She has already set out how the education of every child and the quality of every school counts.

 

Every school accountable to local government, not bringing back selection.

We have aspirations for all children, not just a few.

 

Now my first public engagement as Labour leader came within an hour of being elected.

 

I was proud to speak at the ‘Refugees Welcome’ rally in London. I wanted to send out a message of the kinder politics we are pursuing and a caring society we want to achieve.

 

I have been inspired by people across our country.

 

Making collections for the refugees in Calais. Donating to charities.

 

The work of Citizens UK to involve whole communities in this effort.

 

These refugees are the victims of war - many the victims of the brutal conflict in Syria.

 

It is a huge crisis, the worst humanitarian crisis in Europe since the Second World War. And globally it’s the biggest refugee crisis there has ever been.

 

But the scale of the response from the government, Europe and the international community isn’t enough.

 

And whilst the government is providing welcome aid to the region, especially in the Lebanon, we all know much more needs to be done. Because it’s a crisis of human beings just like you and just like me looking for security and looking for safety. Let’s reach out the hand of humanity and friendship to them.

 

Now let me say something about national security.

 

The best way to protect the British people against the threats we face to our safety at home and abroad is to work to resolve conflict.

 

That isn’t easy, but it is unavoidable if we want real security.

 

Our British values are internationalist and universal.

 

They are not limited by borders.

 

Britain does need strong, modern military and security forces to keep us safe.

 

And to take a lead in humanitarian and peace keeping missions - working with and strengthening the United Nations.

 

On my first day in Parliament as Labour Leader it was a privilege to meet the soldiers and medics who did such remarkable work in tackling the Ebola crisis in Sierra Leone.

 

There is no contradiction between working for peace across the world and doing what is necessary to keep us safe.

 

Today we face very different threats from the time of the Cold War which ended thirty years ago.

 

That’s why I have asked our Shadow Defence Secretary, Maria Eagle, to lead a debate and review about how we deliver that strong, modern effective protection for the people of Britain.

 

I’ve made my own position on one issue clear. And I believe I have a mandate from my election on it.

 

I don’t believe £100 billion on a new generation of nuclear weapons taking up a quarter of our defence budget is the right way forward.

 

I believe Britain should honour our obligations under the Non Proliferation Treaty and lead in making progress on international nuclear disarmament.

 

But in developing our policy through the review we must make sure we all the jobs and skills of everyone in every aspect of the defence industry are fully protected and fully utilised so that we gain from this, we don’t lose from this. To me, that is very important.

 

And on foreign policy we need to learn the lessons of the recent past.

 

It didn’t help our national security that, at the same time I was protesting outside the Iraqi Embassy about Saddam Hussein’s brutality, Tory ministers were secretly conniving with illegal arms sales to his regime.

 

It didn’t help our national security when we went to war with Iraq in defiance of the United Nations and on a false prospectus.

 

It didn’t help our national security to endure the loss of hundreds of brave British soldiers in that war while making no proper preparation for what to do after the fall of the regime.

 

Nor does it help our national security to give such fawning and uncritical support to regimes like Saudi Arabia and Bahrain - who abuse their own citizens and repress democratic rights. These are issues we have to stand up on and also recognise in some cases they are using British weapons in their assault on Yemen. We have got to be clear on where our objectives are.

 

But there is a recent object lesson in how real leadership can resolve conflicts, prevent war and build real security.

 

It’s the leadership, the clever and difficult diplomacy that has been shown by Barack Obama and others in reaching the historic deal with Iran. A deal that opens the way for new diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict in Syria.

 

The scale of the destruction and suffering in Syria is truly dreadful.

 

More than a quarter of a million people killed.

 

More than ten million driven from their homes.

 

I yield to no-one in my opposition to the foul and despicable crimes committed by Isil and by the Assad government including barrel bombs being dropped on civilian targets.

 

We all want the atrocities to stop and the Syrian people free to determine their own destiny.

 

But the answer to this complex and tragic conflict can’t simply be found in a few more bombs.

 

I agree with Paddy Ashdown when he says that military strikes against Isil aren’t succeeding, not because we do not have enough high explosives, but because we do not have a diplomatic strategy on Syria.

 

That’s the challenge for leadership now, for us, for David Cameron.

 

The clever, patient, difficult diplomacy Britain needs to play a leading role in.

 

That’s why Hilary Benn and I together are calling for a new United Nations Security Council resolution that can underpin a political solution to the crisis.

 

I believe the UN can yet bring about a process that leads to an end to the violence in Syria. Yesterday’s meetings in New York were very important.

 

Social democracy itself was exhausted.

 

Dead on its feet.

 

Yet something new and invigorating, popular and authentic has exploded.

 

To understand this all of us have to share our ideas and our contributions.

 

Our common project must be to embrace the emergence of a modern left movement and harness it to build a society for the majority.

 

Now some media commentators who’ve spent years complaining about how few people have engaged with political parties have sneered at our huge increase in membership.

 

If they were sports reporters writing about a football team they’d be saying:

 

“They’ve had a terrible summer. They’ve got 160,000 new fans. Season tickets are sold out. The new supporters are young and optimistic. I don’t know how this club can survive a crisis like this.”

 

We celebrate the enthusiasm of so many people, old and young, from all communities.

 

In every part of the country.

 

Joining Labour as members and supporters.

 

And we need to change in response to this movement.

 

Our new members want to be active and involved.

 

Want to have a say in our Labour Party’s policies.

 

Want to lead local and national campaigns against injustice and the dreadful impact of Tory austerity.

 

Want to work in their local communities to make people’s lives better.

 

They don’t want to do things the old way.

 

Young people and older people are fizzing with ideas. Let’s give them the space for that fizz to explode into the joy we want of a better society.

 

They want a new politics of engagement and involvement.

 

Many of them are already active in their communities, in voluntary organisations, in local campaigns.

 

And we’ve convinced them now to take a further step and join our Labour Party.

 

What a tremendous opportunity for our Labour Party to be the hub of every community.

 

The place where people come together to campaign.

 

To debate, to build friendships, to set up new community projects.

 

To explain and talk to their neighbours about politics, about changing Britain for the better.

 

That’s going to mean a lot of change for the way we’ve done our politics in the past.

 

Our new Deputy Leader Tom Watson is well up for that challenge. He’s leading the charge and leading the change of the much greater use of digital media as a key resource.

 

That is the way of communication, it is not just through broadsheet newspapers or tabloids, it’s social media that really is the point of communication of the future. We have got to get that.

 

One firm commitment I make to people who join our Labour Party is that you have a real say, the final say in deciding on the policies of our party.

 

No-one - not me as Leader, not the Shadow Cabinet, not the Parliamentary Labour Party - is going to impose policy or have a veto.

 

The media commentariat don’t get it.

 

They’ve been keen to report disagreements as splits: agreement and compromise as concessions and capitulation

 

No.

 

This is grown up politics.

 

Where people put forward different views.

 

We debate issues.

 

We take a decision and we go forward together.

 

We look to persuade each other.

 

On occasions we might agree to disagree.

 

But whatever the outcome we stand together, united as Labour, to put forward a better way to the misery on offer from the Conservatives.

 

There’s another important thing about how we are going to do this.

 

It’s a vital part of our new politics.

 

I want to repeat what I said at the start of the leadership election.

 

I do not believe in personal abuse of any sort.

 

Treat people with respect.

 

Treat people as you wish to be treated yourself.

 

Listen to their views, agree or disagree but have that debate.

 

There is going to be no rudeness from me.

 

Maya Angelou said: “You may not control all the events that happen to you, but you can decide not to be reduced by them.”

 

I want a kinder politics, a more caring society.

 

Don’t let them reduce you to believing in anything less.

 

So I say to all activists, whether Labour or not, cut out the personal attacks.

 

The cyberbullying.

 

And especially the misogynistic abuse online.

 

And let’s get on with bringing values back into politics.

 

So what are our first big campaigns?

 

I want to start with a fundamental issue about democratic rights for Britain.

 

Just before Parliament rose for the summer the Tories sneaked out a plan to strike millions of people off the electoral register this December.

 

A year earlier than the advice of the independent Electoral Commission.

 

It means two million or more people could lose their right to vote.

 

That’s 400,000 people in London. It’s 70,000 people in Glasgow.

 

Thousands in every town and city, village and hamlet all across the country

 

That’s overwhelmingly students, people in insecure accommodation, and short stay private lets.

 

We know why the Tories are doing it.

 

They want to gerrymander next year’s Mayoral election in London by denying hundreds of thousands of Londoners their right to vote.

 

They want to do the same for the Assembly elections in Wales.

 

And they want to gerrymander electoral boundaries across the country.

 

By ensuring new constituencies are decided on the basis of the missing registers when the Boundary Commission starts its work in April 2016.

 

Conference we are going to do our best to stop them.

 

We will highlight this issue in Parliament and outside.

 

We will work with Labour councils across the country to get people back on the registers.

 

And from today our Labour Party starts a nationwide campaign for all our members to work in every town and city, in every university as students start the new term, to stop the Tory gerrymander. To get people on the electoral register.

 

It’s hard work - as I know from 10 years as the election agent for a marginal London constituency.

 

But now we have new resources.

 

The power of social media.

 

The power of our huge new membership.

 

Conference, let’s get to it. Get those people on the register to give us those victories but also to get fairness within our society.

 

And, friends, we need to renew our party in Scotland. I want to pay tribute today to our leader in Scotland, Kezia Dugdale and her team of MSPs in the Scottish Parliament.

 

I know that people in Scotland have been disappointed by the Labour Party.

 

I know you feel we lost our way.

 

I agree with you.

 

Kezia has asked people to take another look at the Labour Party.

 

And that’s what I want people across Scotland to do.

 

Under Kezia and my leadership we will change.

 

We will learn the lessons of the past.

 

And we will again make Labour the great fighting force you expect us to be.

 

We need to be investing in skills, investing in our young people – not cutting student numbers. Giving young people real hope and real opportunity.

 

Conference, it is Labour that is the progressive voice for Scotland.

 

There’s another big campaign we need to lead.

 

David Cameron’s attack on the living standards of low paid workers and their families through the assault on tax credits.

 

First, remind people over and over again David Cameron pledged during the election not to cut child tax credits.

 

On the Question Time Leader’s debate he said he had rejected child tax credit cuts.

 

It’s a shocking broken promise - and the Tories voted it through in Parliament just two weeks ago.

 

How can it be right for a single mother working as a part time nurse earning just £18,000 to lose £2,000 to this broken promise?

 

Some working families losing nearly £3,500 a year to this same broken promise.

 

And how can it be right or fair to break this promise while handing out an inheritance tax cut to 60,000 of the wealthiest families in the country? See the contrast

 

So we’ll fight this every inch of the way.

 

And we’ll campaign at the workplace, in every community against this Tory broken promise.

 

And to expose the absurd lie that the Tories are on the side of working people, that they are giving Britain a pay rise.

 

It was one of the proudest days of my life when cycling home from Parliament at 5 o’clock in the morning having voted for the national minimum wage legislation to go through.

 

So of course it’s good to see a minimum wage.

 

But the phoney rebranding of it as a living wage doesn’t do anyone any good.

 

And the Institute of Fiscal Studies has shown Cameron’s broken promise mean millions of workers are still left far worse off.

 

They can and must be changed.

 

As I travelled the country during the leadership campaign it was wonderful to see the diversity of all the people in our country.

 

And that is now being reflected in our membership with more black, Asian and ethnic minority members joining our party.

 

Even more inspiring is the unity and unanimity of their values.

 

A belief in coming together to achieve more than we can on our own.

 

Fair play for all.

 

Solidarity and not walking by on the other side of the street when people are in trouble.

 

Respect for other people’s point of view.

 

It is this sense of fair play, these shared majority British values that are the fundamental reason why I love this country and its people.

 

These values are what I was elected on: a kinder politics and a more caring society.

 

They are Labour values and our country’s values.

 

We’re going to put these values back into politics.

 

I want to rid Britain of injustice, to make it fairer, more decent, more equal.

 

And I want all our citizens to benefit from prosperity and success.

 

There is nothing good about cutting support to the children of supermarket workers and cleaners.

 

There is nothing good about leaving hundreds of thousands unable to feed themselves, driving them to foodbanks that have almost become an institution.

 

And there is nothing good about a Prime Minister wandering around Europe trying to bargain away the rights that protect our workers.

 

As our Conference decided yesterday we will oppose that and stand up for the vision of a social Europe, a Europe of unity and solidarity, to defend those rights.

 

I am proud of our history.

 

It is a history of courageous people who defied overwhelming odds to fight for the rights and freedoms we enjoy today.

 

The rights of women to vote.

 

The rights and dignity of working people;

 

Our welfare state.

 

The NHS - rightly at the centre of Danny Boyle’s great Olympic opening ceremony.

 

The BBC.

 

Both great institutions.

 

Both under attack by the Tories.

 

Both threatened by the idea that profit comes first, not the needs and interests of our people. That’s the difference between us and the Tories.

 

So let me make this commitment.

 

Our Labour Party will always put people’s interests before profit.

 

Now I want to say a bit more about policy – and the review that Angela Eagle has announced this week.

 

Let’s start by recognising the huge amount of agreement we start from, thanks to the work that Angela led in the National Policy Forum.

 

Then we need to be imaginative and recognise the ways our country is changing.

 

In my leadership campaign I set out some ideas for how we should support small businesses and the self-employed.

That’s because one in seven of the labour force now work for themselves.

 

Some of them have been driven into it as their only response to keep an income coming in, insecure though it is.

 

But many people like the independence and flexibility self-employment brings to their lives, the sense of being your own boss.

 

And that’s a good thing.

 

But with that independence comes insecurity and risk especially for those on the lowest and most volatile incomes.

 

There’s no Statutory Sick Pay if they have an accident at work.

 

There’s no Statutory Maternity Pay for women when they become pregnant

 

They have to spend time chasing bigger firms to pay their invoices on time, so they don’t slip further into debt.

 

They earn less than other workers.

 

On average just £11,000 a year.

 

And their incomes have been hit hardest by five years of Tory economic failure.

 

So what are the Tories doing to help the self-employed, the entrepreneurs they claim to represent?

 

They’re clobbering them with the tax credit cuts.

 

And they are going to clobber them again harder as they bring in Universal Credit.

 

So I want our policy review to tackle this in a really serious way. And be reflective of what modern Britain is actually like.

 

Labour created the welfare state as an expression of a caring society – but all too often that safety net has holes in it, people fall through it, and it is not there for the self-employed. It must be. That is the function of a universal welfare state.

 

Consider opening up Statutory Maternity and Paternity Pay to the self-employed so all new born children can get the same level of care from their parents.

 

I’ve asked Angela Eagle, our Shadow Business Secretary, and Owen Smith, our Shadow Work and Pensions Secretary, to look at all the ways we can we support self-employed people and help them to grow their businesses.

 

And I want to thank Lillian Greenwood, our Shadow Transport Secretary for the speed and skill with which she has moved policy on the future of our railways forward.

 

It was wonderful to see Conference this morning agree our new plan to bring private franchises into public ownership as they expire.

 

Labour’s policy now is to deliver the fully integrated, publicly owned railway the British people want and need. That’s the Labour policy, that’s the one we’ll deliver on.

 

Housing policy too is a top priority.

 

Perhaps nowhere else has Tory failure been so complete and so damaging to our people.

 

In the last parliament at least half a million fewer homes built than needed.

 

Private rents out of control.

 

A third of private rented homes not meeting basic standards of health and safety.

 

The chance of owning a home a distant dream for the vast majority of young people.

 

There’s no answer to this crisis that doesn’t start with a new council house-building programme.

 

With new homes that are affordable to rent and to buy.

 

As John Healey, our Shadow Housing Minister, has shown it can pay for itself and make the taxpayer a profit by cutting the housing benefit bill by having reasonable rents, not exorbitant rents

 

And we need new ideas to tackle land hoarding and land speculation.

 

These are issues that are so vital to how things go forward in this country.

 

I want a kinder, more caring politics that does not tolerate more homelessness, more upheaval for families in temporary accommodation.

 

A secure home is currently out of reach for millions.

 

And John Healey has already made a great start on a fundamental review of our housing policies to achieve that.

 

And we are going to make mental health a real priority.

 

It’s an issue for all of us.

 

Every one of us can have a mental health problem.

 

So let’s end the stigma.

 

End the discrimination.

 

And with Luciana Berger, our Shadow Minister for Mental Health, I’m going to challenge the Tories to make parity of esteem for mental health a reality not a slogan.

 

With increased funding – especially for services for children and young people.

 

As three quarters of chronic mental health problems start before the age of 18.

 

Yet only a quarter of those young people get the help they need.

 

All our work on policy will be underpinned by Labour’s values.

 

End the stigma, end the discrimination, treat people with mental health conditions as you would wish to be treated yourself. That’s our pledge.

 

Let’s put them back into politics.

 

Let’s build that kinder, more caring world.

 

Since the dawn of history in virtually every human society there are some people who are given a great deal and many more people who are given little or nothing.

 

Some people have property and power, class and capital, status and clout which are denied to the many.

 

And time and time again, the people who receive a great deal tell the many to be grateful to be given anything at all.

 

They say that the world cannot be changed and the many must accept the terms on which they are allowed to live in it.

 

These days this attitude is justified by economic theory.

 

The many with little or nothing are told they live in a global economy whose terms cannot be changed.

 

They must accept the place assigned to them by competitive markets.

 

By the way, isn’t it curious that globalisation always means low wages for poor people, but is used to justify massive payments to top chief executives.

 

Our Labour Party came into being to fight that attitude.

 

That is still what our Labour Party is all about. Labour is the voice that says to the many, at home and abroad: “you don’t have to take what you’re given.”

 

Labour says:

 

“You may be born poor but you don’t have to stay poor. You don’t have to live without power and without hope.

 

“You don’t have to set limits on your talent and your ambition - or those of your children.

 

“You don’t have to accept prejudice and discrimination, or sickness or poverty, or destruction and war.

 

“You don’t have to be grateful to survive in a world made by others.

 

No, you set the terms for the people in power over you, and you dismiss them when they fail you.”

 

That’s what democracy is about.

 

That has always been our Labour Party’s message.

 

You don’t have to take what you’re given.

 

It was the great Nigerian writer Ben Okri who perhaps put it best:

 

“The most authentic thing about us is our capacity to create, to overcome, to endure, to transform, to love”.

 

But they’re at it again.

 

The people who want you to take what you’re given.

 

This Tory government.

 

This government which was made by the few - and paid for by the few.

 

Since becoming leader David Cameron has received £55 million in donations from hedge funds. From people who have a lot and want to keep it all.

 

That is why this pre-paid government came into being.

 

To protect the few and tell all the rest of us to accept what we’re given.

 

To deliver the £145 million tax break they have given the hedge funds in return.

 

They want us to believe there is no alternative to cutting jobs.

 

Slashing public services.

 

Vandalising the NHS.

 

Cutting junior doctor’s pay.

 

Reducing care for the elderly.

 

Destroying the hopes of young people for a college education or putting university graduates into massive debt.

 

Putting half a million more children in poverty.

 

They want the people of Britain to accept all of these things.

 

They expect millions of people to work harder and longer for a lower quality of life on lower wages. Well, they’re not having it.

 

Our Labour Party says no.

The British people never have to take what they are given.

 

And certainly not when it comes from Cameron and Osborne.

 

So Conference, I come almost to the end of my first conference speech, and I think you for listening OK, alright, don’t worry. Listen, I’ve spoken at 37 meetings since Saturday afternoon, is that not enough? Well talk later.

 

So I end conference with a quote.

 

The last bearded man to lead the Labour Party was a wonderful great Scotsman, Keir Hardie who died about a century ago this weekend and we commemorated him with a book we launched on Sunday evening. Kier grew up in dreadful poverty and made so much of his life and founded our party.

 

Stood up to be counted on votes for women, stood up for social justice, stood up to develop our political party.

 

We own him and so many more so much. And he was asked once summaries what you are about, summarise what you really mean in your life. And he thought for a moment and he said this:

 

“My work has consisted of trying to stir up a divine discontent with wrong”.

 

Don’t accept injustice, stand up against prejudice.

 

Let us build a kinder politics, a more caring society together.

 

Let us put our values, the people’s values, back into politics.

 

Thank you.

Thank you for that introduction. And how brilliant it is to see the hall here in Liverpool, absolutely packed for the Labour conference, well I say it's packed but Virgin Trains assure me there are 800 empty seats.

 

Either way Conference, it’s a huge pleasure to be holding our party’s annual gathering here in this fantastic city that has shaped our country, our economy, our culture and our music.

 

Liverpool and its people have always been central to the Labour party and our movement. And I know some people say campaigns and protests don’t change things. But the Hillsborough families have shown just how wrong that is.

 

It’s taken twenty-seven years but those families have, with great courage and dignity, finally got some truth and justice for the ninety-six who died. And I want to pay tribute to all the families and campaigners, for their solidarity, their commitment and their love.

 

We must learn from them so we promise those campaigning for Orgreave, for Shrewsbury, for the thousands of workers blacklisted for being trade unionists that we will support your battles for truth and justice and when we return to government we will make sure that you have both.

 

Because winning justice for all and changing society for the benefit of all is at the heart of what Labour is about.

 

So yes, our party is about campaigning and it’s about protest too.

 

But most of all it’s about winning power in local and national government, to deliver the real change our country so desperately needs.

 

That’s why the central task of the whole Labour party, must be to rebuild trust and support to win the next general election and form the next government. That is the government I am determined to lead, to win power to change Britain for the benefit of working people.

 

But every one of us in this hall today knows that we will only get there if we work together. And I think it’s fair to say after what we’ve been through these past few months that hasn’t always been exactly the case.

 

Those months have been a testing time for the whole party, first the horrific murder of Jo Cox, followed by the shock of the referendum result and then the tipping over of divisions in parliament, into the leadership contest that ended last Saturday.

 

Jo’s killing was a hate-filled attack on democracy itself that shocked the whole country. Jo Cox didn't just believe in loving her neighbor, she believed in loving her neighbour’s neighbor, that every life counted the same.

 

And as Jo said in her maiden speech as an MP “we have far more in common with each other than things that divide us”. Let that essential truth guide us as we come together again to challenge this Tory Government and its shaky grip on power.

 

We have also lost good MPs like Michael Meacher and Harry Harpham. They were Labour through and through, passionate campaigners for a better world.

 

And let me pay particular tribute to those parliamentary colleagues who stepped forward in the summer to fill the gaps in the shadow cabinet and ensure that Labour could function as an effective opposition in parliament.

 

They didn’t seek office, but they stepped up when their party and in fact the country needed them to serve. They all deserve the respect and gratitude of our party and movement. And this conference should thank them today, they are our future.

 

We’ve just had our second leadership election within a year. It had its fraught moments of course, not only for Owen Smith and me , and I hope we don’t make a habit of it.

 

But there have also been upsides. Over 150,000 new members joined our party. Young rising stars have shone on the front bench and we found that the party is more united on policy than we would ever have guessed.

 

I am honoured to have been re-elected by our party a second time with an even larger mandate. But we all have lessons to learn and a responsibility to do things better and work together more effectively. I will lead in learning those lessons and I’d like to thank Owen, for the campaign and his work as shadow work and pensions secretary.

 

And all the Labour Party Staff and my own team for their brilliant work.

 

One lesson is, that there is a responsibility on all of us to take care with our rhetoric, respect democratic decisions, respect our differences and respect each other. We know that robust debate has at times spilled over into abuse and hate around our party, including misogyny and anti-Semitism, especially on social media.

 

That is utterly unacceptable. Our party must be a safe and welcoming space for everybody and we will continue to take firm action against abuse and intimidation.

 

And let me be absolutely clear, anti-Semitism is an evil, it led to the worst crimes of the 20th century, every one of us has a responsibility to ensure that it is never allowed to fester in our society again. This party always has and always will fight against prejudice and hatred of Jewish people with every breath in its body.

 

We meet this year as the largest political party in western Europe with over half a million members campaigning in every community in Britain.

 

More people have joined our party in the last twenty months than in the previous twenty years. We have more of our fellow citizens in our party than all the others put together.

 

Some may see that as a threat. But I see it as a vast democratic resource. Our hugely increased membership is part of a movement that can take Labour’s message into every community, to win support for the election of a Labour government. Each and every one of these new members is welcome in our party.

 

And after a ten year absence, we welcome back the Fire Brigades Union to our party and to conference. We are reuniting the Labour family.

 

And over the past year, we’ve shown what Labour can do when the party stands together.

 

At conference a year ago, I launched our campaign against cuts to tax credits and we succeeded in knocking this government back.

 

This year, three million families are over £1,000 better off because Labour stood together.

 

In the Budget, the government tried to take away billions from disabled people but we defeated them …

 

We have won all four by-elections we’ve contested. In the May elections, we overtook the Tories to become the largest party nationally. We won back London with a massive win for Sadiq Khan the first Muslim mayor of a western capital city.

 

And we won the Bristol mayor for the first time, Marvin Rees, the first black mayor in any European city. And of course we also won the mayoralty in Salford and here in Liverpool.

 

That’s the road of advance we have to return to if we’re going to challenge the Tories for power and turn the huge growth in the Labour party into the electoral support we need across Britain.

 

There’s no doubt my election as Labour leader a year ago. And re-election this month grew out of a thirst for a new kind of politics, and a conviction that the old way of running the economy and the country, isn’t delivering for more and more people.

 

It’s not about me of course, or unique to Britain but across Europe, North America and elsewhere, people are fed up with a so-called free market system, that has produced grotesque inequality stagnating living standards for the many calamitous foreign wars without end and a political stitch-up which leaves the vast majority of people shut out of power.

 

Since the crash of 2008, the demand for an alternative and an end to counter-productive austerity has led to the rise of new movements and parties in one country after another.

 

In Britain it’s happened in the heart of traditional politics, in the Labour party which is something we should be extremely proud of. It’s exactly what Labour was founded for to be the voice of the many of social justice and progressive change from the bottom up.

 

But it also means it’s no good harking back to the tired old economic and political fixes of twenty years ago because they won’t work anymore. The old model is broken. We’re in a new era that demands a politics and economics that meets the needs of our own time.

 

Even Theresa May gets it, that people want change. That’s why she stood on the steps of Downing Street and talked about the inequalities and burning injustices in today’s Britain.

 

She promised a country: “that works not for a privileged few but for every one of us”.

 

But even if she manages to talk the talk, she can’t walk the walk.

 

This isn’t a new government, it’s David Cameron’s government repackaged with progressive slogans but with a new harsh rightwing edge, taking the country backwards and dithering before the historic challenges of Brexit.

 

Who seriously believes that the Tories could ever stand up to the privileged few? They are the party of the privileged few, funded by the privileged few, for the benefit of the privileged few.

 

This is a party, after all that now wants to force through an undemocratic Boundary Review based on an out-of-date version of the electoral register with nearly two million voters missing.

 

They’ve dressed up as a bid to cut the cost of politics by abolishing fifty MPs, but the £12million savings are dwarfed by the expense of the 260 peers David Cameron appointed at a cost of £34million a year. It’s nothing but a cynical attempt to gerrymander the next election.

 

And this is a prime minister who was elevated to her job without a single vote being cast after a pantomime farce which saw one leading Tory after another falling on their swords.

 

When I meet Theresa May across the dispatch box, I know that only one of us has been elected to the office they hold, by the votes of a third of a million people.

 

In any case, the Tories are simply incapable of responding to the breakdown of the old economic model. Because that failed model is in their political DNA.

 

It’s what they deliver every time they’re in government. Tory governments deregulate, they outsource and privatise they stand by as inequality grows.

 

They’ve cut taxes for the privileged few sold off our national assets to them, always on the cheap and turned a blind eye to their chronic tax avoidance.

 

They’re so committed to the interests of the very richest they recruited Sir Phillip Green into government as something called an efficiency tsar.

 

Well, government might be a bit more efficient if the super-rich like Sir Phillip actually paid their taxes.

 

When government steps back there are consequences for every one of us.

 

Look what’s happened to housing under the Tories:

 

housebuilding has fallen to its lowest level since the 1920s;

home ownership is falling as more people are priced out of the market;

evictions and homelessness go up every year;

council homes are sold off without being replaced.

 

And another consequence is that we’re paying over £9 billion a year to private landlords in housing benefit.

 

Instead of spending public money on building council housing, we’re subsidising private landlords. That’s wasteful, inefficient, and poor government.

 

So Labour will, as Teresa Pearce said, build over a million new homes at least half of them council houses and we will control private rents, so we can give every British family that basic human right - a decent home.

 

It’s the same in the jobs market. Without proper employment regulation, there’s been an explosion of temporary, insecure jobs nearly one million people on zero hour contracts.

 

There are now six million working people earning less than the living wage and poverty among those in work is at record levels.

 

That didn’t happen by accident, the Tories have torn up employment rights and deliberately tried to weaken the organisations that get people justice at work the trade unions.

 

Of course trade unions are not taking this lying down. Look at the great campaign Unite has waged at Sports Direct, to get justice for exploited workers and hold Mike Ashley to account. That is why Labour will repeal the Trade Union Act and set unions free to do their job.

 

And we will raise the minimum wage to a real living wage that brings working people out of poverty and we’ll ban zero hours contracts as John McDonnell and Ian Lavery have set out at this conference.

 

And then there’s the scandal of the privatised railways more public subsidy than under the days of British Rail all going to private firms and more delays more cancellations. And the highest fares in Europe.

 

That is why the great majority of the British people back Labour’s plan, set out by Andy MacDonald, to take the railways back into public ownership.

 

But if you want the most spectacular example of what happens, when government steps back, the global banking crash is an object lesson a deregulated industry of out of control greed and speculation that crashed economies across the globe and required the biggest ever government intervention and public bailout in history.

 

Millions of ordinary families paid the price for that failure. I pledge that Labour will never let a few reckless bankers wreck our economy again.

 

So Labour is offering solutions. During this summer’s leadership campaign, I set out ten pledges which I believe can be the platform for our party’s programme at the next election.

 

They have now been put to you and endorsed by this conference.

 

They lay out the scope of the change we need to see for full employment, a homes guarantee, security at work, a strong public NHS and social care, a National Education Service for all, action on climate change, public ownership and control of our services, a cut in inequality of income and wealth action to secure an equal society and peace and justice at the heart of foreign policy.

 

Don’t worry, they’re not the Ten Commandments. They will now go to the National Policy Forum and the whole party needs to build on them, refine them and above all take them out to the people of this country.

 

But those ten pledges the core of the platform on which I was re-elected leader will now form the framework for what Labour will campaign for and for what a Labour government will do.

 

Together they show the direction of change we are determined to take - and the outline of a programme to rebuild and transform Britain.

 

They are rooted in traditional Labour values and objectives shaped to meet the challenges of the 21st century. They are values Labour is united on. They reflect the views and aspirations of the majority of our people. And they are values our country can and will support as soon as they are given the chance.

 

And these pledges are not just words. Already, across the country, Labour councils are putting Labour values into action, in a way that makes a real difference to millions of people, despite cynical government funding cuts that have hit Labour councils five times as hard as Tory-run areas.

 

Like Nottingham City Council setting up the not-for-profit Robin Hood Energy company to provide affordable energy;

 

Or Cardiff Bus Company taking 100,000 passengers every day, publicly owned with a passenger panel to hold its directors to account;

 

Or Preston Council working to favour local procurement, and keep money in the town;

 

Or Newcastle Council providing free wi-fi in 69 public buildings across the city;

 

Or Croydon Council which has set up a company to build 1,000 new homes, as Cllr Alison Butler said: “We can no longer afford to sit back and let the market take its course”.

 

Or Glasgow that has established high quality and flexible workspaces for start-up, high growth companies in dynamic new sectors.

 

Or here in Liverpool, set to be at the global forefront of a new wave of technology and home to Sensor City, a £15million business hub that aims to create 300 start-up businesses and 1,000 jobs over the next decade.

 

It is a proud Labour record each and every Labour councilor deserves our heartfelt thanks for the work they do.

 

But I want to go further because we want local government to go further and put public enterprise back into the heart of our economy and services to meet the needs of local communities, municipal socialism for the 21st century, as an engine of local growth and development.

 

So today I’m announcing that Labour will remove the artificial local borrowing cap and allow councils to borrow against their housing stock.

 

That single measure alone would allow them to build an extra 60,000 council homes a year.

 

Labour councils increasingly have a policy of in-house as the preferred provider and many councils have brought bin collections, cleaners, and IT services back in-house, insourcing privatized contracts to save money for council tax payers and to ensure good terms and conditions for staff.

 

I have said that Labour will put security at work and employment and union rights from day one centre stage.

 

But one in six workers now in Britain are now self-employed. They’re right to value their independence but for too many it comes with insecurity and a woeful lack of rights.

 

So we will review arrangements for self-employed people including social security that self-employed people pay for in their taxes, yet aren’t fully covered by.

 

And we will ensure that successful innovators have access to the finance necessary to take their ideas to the next level grow their businesses and generate employment.

 

So as part of our Workplace 2020 review, we will make sure that and our tax and social security arrangements are fit for the 21st century, consulting with self-employed workers and the Federation of Small Businesses.

 

If the Tories are the party of cuts and short-termism. Labour is the Party of investing for the future.

 

With the same level of investment as other major economies, we could be so much more unlock so much skill, ingenuity and wealth.

 

That’s why we’ll establish a National Investment Bank at the heart of our plan to rebuild and transform Britain.

 

And we will borrow to invest at historically low interest rates, to generate far greater returns. It would be foolish not to, because that investment is expanding the economy and the income it generates for us all in the process.

 

Even this government, after years of austerity and savage cuts to investment is starting to change its tune.

 

I am not content with accepting second-class broadband, not content with creaking railways, not content with seeing the US and Germany investing in cutting edge and green technologies, while Britain lags behind.

 

Last year, for example the Prime Minister promised a universal service obligation for ten megabyte broadband.

 

But since then the government has done nothing letting down entrepreneurs, businesses and families, especially in rural areas.

 

That’s why we’ve set out proposals for a National Investment Bank with £500 billion of investment to bring our broadband, our railways, our housing and our energy infrastructure up to scratch.

 

A country that doesn’t invest is a country that has given up. That has taken the path of managed decline. A Labour government will never accept second best for Britain.

 

Our country’s history is based on individual ingenuity and collective endeavor.

 

We are the country of Ada Lovelace, Alan Turing and Tim Berners-Lee, the land of Isambard Kingdom Brunel and Sarah Guppy of George Stephenson and Eric Laithwaite.

 

The Tories have turned their back on this proud British tradition. They have put privatisation and cutting spending first.

 

Britain now spends less on research as a share of national income than France, Germany, the US and China. A Labour Government will bring research and development up to three percent of GDP.

 

Yesterday, Rebecca Long Bailey set out the terms of our Industrial Strategy Review. We need an economy that works for every part of this country so that no community is left behind.

 

And today I’m asking everyone, businesses, academics, workers, trade unions and anyone who cares about our future prosperity to have your say in that review.

 

We are a wealthy country - and not just in terms of money.

 

We are rich in talent, rich in potential.

 

That’s why we’ve proposed a comprehensive National Education Service at the heart of our programme for government to deliver high quality education for all throughout our lives.

 

Education has always been a core Labour value from the time of Ellen Wilkinson and before.

 

And a National Education Service will be an essential part of the 21st century welfare state.

 

In a rapidly changing economy people need to re-train or upgrade their skills without falling into debt.

 

Britain already lags behind other in productivity.

 

Partly that’s about investing in technology and infrastructure.

 

And partly it’s about investing in people and their skills.

 

How can we build and expand the sectors of the future without a skilled workforce?

 

But this Conservative government has slashed adult education budgets taking away opportunities for people to develop their skills and leaving businesses struggling to find the skilled workforce they need to succeed.

 

So today I am offering business a new settlement. A new deal for Rebuilding Britain.

 

Under Labour we will provide the investment to rebuild Britain’s infrastructure.

 

We will fund that investment because it will lead to a more productive economy providing the basis on which our economy and our businesses can thrive, helping to provide over a million good jobs and opportunities for businesses.

 

But investment in capital must include investment in human capital, the skilled workers needed to make our economy a success.

 

So this is the deal Labour will offer to business.

 

To help pay for a National Education Service, we will ask you pay a little more in tax.

 

We’ve already started to set out some of this, pledging to raise corporation tax by less than 1.5 percent to give an Education Maintenance Allowance to college students and grants to university students so that every young learner can afford to support themselves as they develop skills and get qualifications.

 

Business shares in economic success and it must contribute to it too.

 

And I recognise that good businesses deserve a level playing field.

 

So I also pledge to good businesses that we will clamp down those that dodge their taxes you should not be undercut by those that don’t play by the rules.

 

There is nothing more unpatriotic than not paying your taxes it is an act of vandalism, damaging our NHS, damaging older people’s social care, damaging younger people’s education. So a Labour government will make shabby tax avoidance a thing of the past.

 

Labour’s National Education Service is going to be every bit as vital as our National Health Service has become.

 

And we recognise that education isn’t simply about preparing for the workplace. It’s also about the exploration of knowledge and unlocking the creativity in every human being.

 

So all school pupils should have the chance to learn an instrument take part in drama and dance and have regular access to a theatre, gallery or museum in their local area.

 

That’s why we will introduce an arts pupil premium to every primary school in England and Wales and consult on the design and national roll-out to extend this pupil premium to all secondary schools.

 

This will be a £160million boost for schools to invest in projects that will support cultural activities for schools over the longer-term.

 

It could hardly be more different to the Tory approach to education. Their only plan is the return of grammar schools, segregation and second class schooling for the majority and what a great job Angela Rayner is doing in opposing them.

 

So this Saturday 1 October, I want you to take the message into your community that Labour is standing up for education for all.

 

Grammar Schools are not the only way, the Tories are bringing division back into our society. They are also using the tried-and-tested tricks of demonising and scapegoating to distract from their failures.

 

Whether it be single mothers, unemployed people, disabled people or migrants, Tory failure is always someone else’s fault.

 

And those smears have consequences, from children being bullied in school, to attacks in the street - such as the rise of disability hate crime.

 

I am so proud of this party. In the last year, we stood up to the government on cuts to disabled people’s benefits and cuts to working families tax credits.

 

And on Monday, our shadow work & pensions secretary Debbie Abrahams announced we would be scrapping the punitive sanctions regime and the degrading Work Capability Assessment.

 

As politicians, as political activists, as citizens, we must have zero tolerance towards those who whip up hate and division, stand together against racism, Islamophobia and anti-Semitism and defend those being demonised.

 

It has been shaming to our multicultural society that assaults on migrants have increased sharply since the referendum campaign a campaign that peddled myths and whipped up division.

 

It isn’t migrants that drive down wages, it’s exploitative employers and the politicians who deregulate the labour market and rip up trade union rights.

 

It isn’t migrants who put a strain on our NHS, it only keeps going because of the migrant nurses and doctors who come here filling the gaps left by politicians who have failed to invest in training.

 

It isn’t migrants that have caused a housing crisis; it’s a Tory government that has failed to build homes.

 

Immigration can certainly put extra pressure on services and that’s why, under Gordon Brown, Labour setup the Migrant Impact Fund to provide extra funding to communities that have the largest rises in population.

 

What did the Tories do? They abolished it and then they demonise migrants for putting pressure on services.

 

A Labour government will not offer false promises on immigration as the Tories have done. We will not sow division by fanning the flames of fear. We will tackle the real issues of immigration instead whatever the eventual outcome of the Brexit negotiations and make the changes that are needed.

 

We will act decisively to end the undercutting of workers’ pay and conditions through the exploitation of migrant labour and agency working which would reduce the number of migrant workers in the process.

 

And we will ease the pressure on hard pressed public services - services that are struggling to absorb Tory austerity cuts, in communities absorbing new populations.

 

Labour will reinstate the migrant impact fund, and give extra support to areas of high migration using the visa levy for its intended purpose. And we will add a citizenship application fee levy to boost the fund.

 

That is the Labour way to tackle social tension investment and assistance, not racism and division.

 

This party campaigned hard to remain in the European Union. I spoke at rallies from Cornwall to Aberdeenshire for our Labour campaign to remain and reform.

 

But although most Labour voters backed us we did not convince millions of natural Labour voters especially in those parts of the country left behind.

 

Left behind by years of neglect under-investment and de-industrialisation.

 

Now we have to face the future together we are not helped by patronising or lecturing those in our communities who voted to leave. We have to hear their concerns about jobs, about public services, about wages, about immigration, about a future for their children. And we have to respect their votes, and the decision of the British people.

 

Of course that doesn’t mean giving a blank cheque to Theresa May and her three-legged team of fractious Brexiteers as they try to work up a negotiating plan and squabble about whose turn it is to have the Chevening country retreat each weekend.

 

We have made it clear that we will resist a Brexit at the expense of workers’ rights and social justice we have set out our red lines on employment, environmental and social protection and on access to the European market.

 

But we will also be pressing our own Brexit agenda including the freedom to intervene in our own industries without the obligation to liberalise or privatise our public services and building a new relationship with Europe based on cooperation and internationalism.

 

And as Europe faces the impact of a refugee crisis fuelled by wars across the Middle East we have to face the role that repeated military interventions by British governments have played in that crisis.

 

The Chilcot report made absolutely clear, the lessons to be learned from the disastrous invasion and occupation of Iraq, just as this month’s Foreign Affair Select Committee report into the war in Libya demonstrated those lessons had still not been learned a decade later.

 

The consequences of those wars have been the spread of terrorism, sectarianism and violence across an arc of conflict that has displaced millions of people forcing them from their countries.

 

That is why it was right to apologise on behalf of the party for the Iraq war right to say that we have learned the lessons and right to say that such a catastrophe must never be allowed to happen again.

 

We need a foreign policy based on peace, justice and human rights and what great news to hear the peace treaty in Colombia after fifty years of war and we need to honour our international treaty obligations on nuclear disarmament and encourage others to do the same.

 

We are a long way from that humanitarian vision. Britain continues to sell arms to Saudi Arabia, a country that the United Nations says is committing repeated violations of international humanitarian law war crimes in Yemen just as we have seen taking place in Syria.

 

So today I make it clear that under a Labour government when there are credible reports of human rights abuses or war crimes being committed British arms sales will be suspended, starting with Saudi Arabia.

 

Last year, the votes we needed to win power went many different ways in all parts of our country while millions of our potential voters stayed at home.

 

Many didn’t believe we offered the alternative they wanted.

 

It’s true there’s an electoral mountain to climb.

 

But if we focus everything on the needs and aspirations of middle and lower income voters, of ordinary families, if we demonstrate we’ve got a viable alternative to the government’s failed economic policies. I’m convinced we can build the electoral support that can beat the Tories.

 

That means being the voice of women, of young people and pensioners middle and lower income workers, the unemployed and the self-employed, minority communities and those struggling with the impact of migration at work and everyone struggling to get on, and secure a better life for themselves, their families and communities.

 

Running like a golden thread through Labour’s vision for today as throughout our history is the struggle for equality.

 

Rampant inequality has become the great scandal of our time, sapping the potential of our society, and tearing at its fabric.

 

Labour’s goal isn’t just greater equality of wealth and income but also of power.

 

Our aim could not be more ambitious. We want a new settlement for the 21st century, in politics, business, our communities with the environment, and in our relations with the rest of the world.

 

Every one of us in the Labour party is motivated by the gap between what our country is and what it could be.

 

We know that in the sixth largest economy in the world the foodbanks, stunted life chances and growing poverty alongside wealth on an undreamed of scale are a mark of shameful and unnecessary failure.

 

We know how great this country could be, for all its people, with a new political and economic settlement.

 

With new forms of democratic public ownership, driven by investment in the technology and industries of the future, with decent jobs, education and housing for all with local services run by and for people not outsourced to faceless corporations.

 

That’s not backward-looking, it’s the very opposite.

 

It’s the socialism of the 21st century.

 

Our job is now to win over the unconvinced to our vision. Only that way can we secure the Labour government we need.

 

And let’s be frank, no one will be convinced of a vision, promoted by a divided party. We all agree on that.

 

So I ask each and every one of you, accept the decision of the members end the trench warfare and work together to take on the Tories.

 

Anything else is a luxury that the millions of people who depend on Labour cannot afford.

 

We know there will be local elections next May. In Scotland, where we have won three council by-elections this summer, in Wales and in counties across England.

 

And there'll be metro mayor elections too, including here on Merseyside, where my good friend Steve Rotherham will standing as Labour's candidate, Steve, best of luck, I will miss your comradeship and support.

 

But we could also face a general election next year.

 

Whatever the Prime Minister says about snap elections, there is every chance that Theresa May, will cut and run, for an early election.

 

So I put our party on notice today, Labour is preparing for a general election in 2017, we expect all our members to support our campaign and we will be ready for the challenge whenever it comes.

 

Let us do it, in the spirit of the great Scots-born Liverpool football manager Bill Shankly who said:

 

"The socialism I believe in, is everybody working for the same goal and everybody having a share in the rewards. That's how I see football, that's how I see life."

 

We are not all Bill Shanklys. Each of us comes to our socialism from our own experiences.

 

Mine was shaped by my mum and dad, a teacher and an engineer. Both committed socialists and peace campaigners, my mum’s inspiration was to encourage girls to believe they could achieve anything in their lives.

 

And by working as a teacher in Jamaica when I was a young man, that taught me so much about the strength of communities living in adversity, as well as fighting for the low paid as a trade union organiser here in Britain.

 

As the great American poet Langston Hughes put it: “I see that my own hands can make the world that’s in my mind”.

 

Everyone here and every one of our hundreds of thousands of members has something to contribute to our cause.

 

That way we will unite, build on our policies. Take our vision out to a country crying out for change.

 

We are half a million of us, and there will be more, working together to make our country the place it could be.

 

Conference, united we can shape the future and build a fairer Britain in a peaceful world.

We meet here this week as a united Party, advancing in every part of Britain, winning the confidence of millions of our fellow citizens, setting out our ideas and plans for our country’s future, that have already inspired people of all ages and backgrounds.

 

And it’s a privilege to be speaking in Brighton. A city that not only has a long history of hosting Labour conferences, but also of inspirational Labour activists.

 

It was over a century ago, here in Brighton, that a teenage shop worker had had enough of the terrible conditions facing her and her workmates. She risked the sack to join the Shop Workers’ Union, after learning about it in a newspaper used to wrap up fish and chips, and was so effective at standing up for women shop workers, she became assistant general secretary before the age of 30.

 

In that role she seconded the historic resolution at the Trades Union Congress of 1899 to set up the Labour Representation Committee so that working people would finally have representation in Parliament.

 

That became the Labour Party and it was this woman, Margaret Bondfield who later become a Labour MP. And in 1929, the first ever woman to join the British cabinet’

 

From a Brighton drapery to Downing Street. Margaret Bondfield’s story is a reminder of the decisive role women have played in the Labour Party from its foundation, and that Labour has always been about making change by working together and standing up for others.

 

Conference, against all predictions in June we won the largest increase in the Labour vote since 1945 and achieved Labour’s best vote for a generation. It’s a result which has put the Tories on notice and Labour on the threshold of power.

 

Yes, we didn’t do quite well enough and we remain in opposition for now, but we have become a Government-in-waiting. Our outstanding shadow cabinet team here today. And our message to the country could not be clearer – Labour is ready.

 

Ready to tackle inequality , ready to rebuild our NHS, ready to give opportunity to young people, dignity and security to older people, ready to invest in our economy and meet the challenges of climate change and automation, ready to put peace and justice at the heart of foreign policy. And ready to build a new and progressive relationship with Europe.

 

We are ready and the Tories are clearly not. They’re certainly not strong and they’re definitely not stable. They’re not remotely united. And they’re hanging on by their fingertips.

 

But this Tory Government does have one thing that we lack. They have tracked down the Magic Money Tree when it was needed to keep Theresa May in Downing Street. It was given a good old shake – and lo and behold – now we know the price of power – it’s about £100m for each Democratic Unionist MP.

 

During the election campaign, Theresa May told voters they faced the threat of a “coalition of chaos . Remember that? Well, now they’re showing us exactly how that works. And I don’t just mean the Prime Minister’s desperate deal with the DUP. She’s got a “coalition of chaos” around her own cabinet table – Phillip Hammond and Liam Fox, Boris Johnson and David Davis.

 

At each other’s throats, squabbling and plotting, manoeuvring to bundle the Prime Minister out of Number Ten and take her place at the first opportunity Instead of getting to grips with the momentous issues facing our country.

 

But this coalition of chaos is no joke. Just look at their record since the Conservatives have been in office;

 

The longest fall in people’s pay since record began. Homelessness doubled

 

NHS waiting lists lengthening. School class sizes growing and teachers leaving. Over 4 million children now in poverty

 

20,000 police officers … and 11,000 firefighters cut. More people in work and in poverty … than ever before. Condemned by the United Nations for violating the rights of disabled people. That’s not strong and stable. It’s callous and calculating. Because the Tories calculated that making life worse for millions in the name of austerity would pay for hefty tax handouts to the rich and powerful.

 

Conference, your efforts in the election campaign stopped the Tories in their tracks. The election result has already delivered one Tory U-turn after another over some of their most damaging policies. The cruel dementia tax was scrapped within three days of being announced. Plans to bring back grammar schools have been ditched . The threat to the pensions’ triple lock abandoned. Withdrawal of Winter Fuel payments dumped. The pledge to bring back fox hunting dropped. And their plan to end free school meals in primary schools has been binned.

 

The reality is that barely three months since the election this coalition of Conservative chaos is tearing up its Manifesto and tearing itself apart. They are bereft of ideas and energy. Indeed, they seem to be cherry-picking Labour policies instead, including on Brexit.

 

I say to the Prime Minister: “You’re welcome . But go the whole hog end austerity, abolish tuition fees, scrap the public sector pay cap. I think we can find a Commons majority for all of that. This is a weak and divided Government with no purpose beyond clinging to power.

 

It is Labour that is now setting the agenda and winning the arguments for a new common sense about the direction our country should take.

 

Conference, there were two stars of our election campaign. The first was our Manifesto that drew on the ideas of our members and trade unionists and the hopes and aspirations of their communities and workplaces. And we were clear about how we would pay for it by asking the richest and the largest corporations to start paying their fair share.

 

Not simply to redistribute within a system that isn’t delivering for most people but to transform that system. So we set out not only how we would protect public services but how we would rebuild and invest in our economy, with a publicly-owned engine of sustainable growth, driven by national and regional investment banks, to generate good jobs and prosperity in every region and nation.

 

Our Manifesto is the programme of a modern, progressive socialist party that has rediscovered its roots and its purpose, bucking the trend across Europe.

 

And Conference, the other star of that campaign was YOU. Our members, our supporters in the trade unions, our doorstep and social media campaigners. Young people sharing messages and stories on social media, hundreds of thousands organising online and on the ground to outplay the Tories’ big money machine.

 

Is it any wonder that here today in Brighton you represent the largest political party in western Europe, with nearly 600,000 members, alongside three million affiliated trade unionists, brimming with enthusiasm and confidence in the potential of our people. You are the future. And let me say straight away. I’m awed and humbled by everything you have done, along with hundreds of thousands of others across the country, to take us to where we are today.

 

I have never been more proud to be your elected leader. Our election campaign gave people strength. It brought millions on to the electoral register and inspired millions to go to vote for the first time.

 

And Labour was the Party of unity, bringing generations and communities together, rather than pitting young and old against each other, as the Tories did. We will never seek to squeeze one generation to support another. Under Labour, people will win together.

 

The result of our campaign confounded every expert and sceptic. I see John McDonnell said the ‘grey beards’ had got it all wrong. I’m not sure that’s entirely fair, John? We wiped out the Tory majority, winning support in every social and age group and gaining seats in every region and nation of the country.

 

So please, Theresa May take another walking holiday and make another impetuous decision. The Labour campaign machine is primed and ready to roll.

 

Of course, there were some who didn’t come out of the election too well. I’m thinking of some of our more traditional media friends. They ran the campaign they always do under orders from their tax exile owners to trash Labour at every turn. The day before the election one paper devoted fourteen pages to attacking the Labour Party. And our vote went up nearly 10%.

 

Never have so many trees died in vain. The British people saw right through it. So this is a message to the Daily Mail’s editor - next time, please could you make it 28 pages?

 

But there’s a serious message too, the campaign by the Tories and their loyal media was nasty and personal. It fuelled abuse online and no one was the target of that more than Diane Abbott. She has a decades-long record of campaigning for social justice and has suffered intolerable misogynistic and racist abuse. Faced with such an overwhelmingly hostile press and an army of social media trolls,it’s even more important that we stand.

 

Yes we will disagree, but there can never be any excuse for any abuse of anybody. We settle our differences with democratic votes and unite around those decision.

 

That is the Labour Party, here this week, and out in the communities EVERY week - diverse, welcoming, democratic and ready to serve our country.

 

There is no bigger test in politics right now than Brexit, an incredibly important and complex process, that cannot be reduced to repeating fairy stories from the side of a bus or waiting 15 months to state the obvious. As democratic socialists, we accept and respect the referendum result, but respect for a democratic decision does not mean giving a green light to a recklesss Tory Brexit agenda that would plunge Britain into a Trump-style race-to-the-bottom in rights and corporate taxes.

 

We are not going to be passive spectators to a hopelessly inept negotiating team putting at risk people’s jobs, rights and living standards. A team more interested in posturing for personal advantage than in getting the best deal for our country. To be fair, Theresa May’s speech in Florence last week did unite the cabinet. for a few hours at least. Her plane had barely touched down at Heathrow before the divisions broke out again.

 

Never has the national interest been so ill-served on such a vital issue, If there were no other reason for the Tories to go their self-interested Brexit bungling would be reason enough. So I have a simple message to the cabinet for Britain’s sake pull yourself together or make way.

 

One thing needs to be made clear straight away. The three million EU citizens currently living and working in Britain are welcome here. They have been left under a cloud of insecurity by this government when their future could have been settled months ago. So Theresa May, give them the full guarantees they deserve today. If you don’t, we will.

 

Since the referendum result our Brexit team has focused above all on our economic future. That future is now under real threat. A powerful faction in the Conservative leadership sees Brexit as their chance to create a tax haven on the shores of Europe a low-wage, low tax deregulated playground for the hedge funds and speculators. A few at the top would do very nicely, no question. But manufacturing industries would go to the wall taking skilled jobs with them our tax base would crumble our public services would be slashed still further.

 

We are now less than 18 months away from leaving the European Union. And so far, the Tory trio leading the talks have got nowhere and agreed next to nothing. This rag-tag Cabinet spends more time negotiating with each other than they do with the EU. A cliff-edge Brexit is at risk of becoming a reality. That is why Labour has made clear that Britain should stay within the basic terms of the single market and a customs union for a limited transition period. It is welcome at least that Theresa May has belatedly accepted that.

 

But beyond that transition, our task is a different one. It is to unite everyone in our country around a progressive vision of what Britain could be, but with a government that stands for the many not the few.

 

Labour is the only party that can bring together those who voted leave and those who backed remain and unite the country for a future beyond Brexi. What matters in the Brexit negotiations is to achieve a settlement that delivers jobs, rights and decent living standards.

 

Conference, the real divide over Brexit could not be. A shambolic Tory Brexit driving down standards. Or a Labour Brexit that puts jobs first a Brexit for the many, one that guarantees unimpeded access to the single market and establishes a new co-operative relationship with the EU.

 

A Brexit that uses powers returned from Brussels to support a new industrial strategy to upgrade our economy in every region and nation. One that puts our economy first not fake immigration targets that fan the flames of fear. We will never follow the Tories into the gutter of blaming migrants for the ills of society. It isn’t migrants who drive down wages and conditions but the worst bosses in collusion with a Conservative government that never misses a chance to attack trade unions and weaken people’s rights at work.

 

Labour will take action to stop employers driving down pay and conditions not pander to scapegoating or racism. How Britain leaves the European Union is too important to be left to the Conservatives and their internal battles and identity crises.

 

Labour will hold Theresa May’s squabbling ministers to account every step of the way in these talks. And, with our Brexit team of Keir Starmer, Emily Thornberry and Barry Gardiner we stand ready to take over whenever this government fails. to negotiate a new relationship with Europe that works for us all reaching outto help create a Europe for the many for the future.

 

The truth is …. That under the Tories Britain’s future is at risk whatever the outcome of the Brexit process. Our economy no longer delivers secure housing secure well-paid jobs or rising living standards. There is a new common sense emerging about how the country should be run. That’s what we fought for in the election and that’s what’s needed to replace the broken model forged by Margaret Thatcher many years ago.

 

And Ten years after the global financial crash the Tories still believe in the same dogmatic mantra – Deregulate, privatise ,cut taxes for the wealthy, weaken rights at work, delivering profits for a few, and debt for the many. Nothing has changed. It’s as if we’re stuck in a political and economic time-warp.

 

As the Financial Times put it last month our “financial system still looks a lot like the pre-crisis one” and the capitalist system still faces a “crisis of legitimacy”, stemming from the crash.

 

Now is the time that government took a more active role in restructuring our economy. Now is the time that corporate boardrooms were held accountable for their actions, And now is the time that we developed a new model of economic management to replace the failed dogmas of neo-liberalism … That is why Labour is looking not just to repair the damage done by austerity but to transform our economy with a new and dynamic role for the public sector particularly where the private sector has evidently failed.

 

Take the water industry. Of the nine water companies in England six are now owned by private equity or foreign sovereign wealth funds. Their profits are handed out in dividends to shareholders while the infrastructure crumbles the companies pay little or nothing in tax and executive pay has soared as the service deteriorates.

 

That is why we are committed to take back our utilities into public ownership to put them at the service of our people and our economy and stop the public being ripped off.

 

Of course there is much more that needs to be done. Our National Investment Bank… and the Transformation Fund will be harnessed to mobilise public investment to create wealth and good jobs. When I’ve met business groups I’ve been frank we will invest in the education and skills of the workforce and we will invest in better infrastructure from energy to digital but we are going to ask big business to pay a bit more tax.

 

The Tory approach to the economy isn’t entrepreneurial It’s extractive. They’re not focused on long-term investment and wealth creation. When you look at what they do rather than what they say it’s all about driving down wages, services and standards … to make as much money as quickly as possible with government not as the servant of the people but of global corporations. And their disregard for rampant inequality the hollowing out of our public services, the disdain for the powerless and the poorhave made our society more brutal and less caring.

 

Now that degraded regime has a tragic monument the chilling wreckage of Grenfell Tower. A horrifying fire in which dozens perished an entirely avoidable human disaster. One which is an indictment not just of decades of failed housing policies and privatisation and the yawning inequality in one of the wealthiest boroughs and cities in the world, it is also a damning indictment of a whole outlook which values council tax refunds for the wealthy above decent provision for all and which has contempt for working class communities.

 

Before the fire, a tenants’ group of Grenfell residents had warned … and I quote words that should haunt all politicians “the Grenfell Action Group firmly believesthat only a catastrophic event will expose the ineptitude and incompetence of our landlord”. Grenfell is not just the result of bad political decisions It stands for a failed and broken system which Labour must and will replace.

 

The poet Ben Okri recently wrote in his poem “Grenfell Tower”:

 

Those who were living now are dead

 

Those who were breathing are from the living earth fled

 

If you want to see how the poor die, come see Grenfell Tower.

 

See the tower, and let a world changing dream flower.

 

We have a duty as a country to learn the lessons from this calamity and ensure that a changed world flowers . I hope that the public inquiry will assist. But a decent home is a right for everyone whatever their income or background. And houses should be homes for the many not speculative investments for a few. Look at the Conservative housing record and you understand why Grenfell residents are sceptical about their Conservative council and this Conservative government.

 

Since 2010: homelessness has doubled, 120,000 children don’t have a home to call their own, home ownership has fallen, thousands are living in homes unfit for human habitation. This is why alongside our Shadow Housing minister John Healey we’re launching a review of social housing policy – its building, planning, regulation and management.

 

We will listen to tenants across the country and propose a radical programme of action to next year’s conference. But some things are already clear tenants are not being listened to.

 

We will insist that every home is fit for human habitation, a proposal this Tory government voted down. And we will control rents – when the younger generation’s housing costs are three times more than those of their grandparents, that is not sustainable.

 

Rent controls exist in many cities across the world and I want our cities to have those powers too and tenants to have those protections. We also need to tax undeveloped land held by developers and have the power to compulsorily purchase. As Ed Miliband said, “Use it or lose it”. Families need homes.

 

After Grenfell we must think again about what are called regeneration schemes.

 

Regeneration is a much abused word.

 

Too often what it really means is forced gentrification and social cleansing, as private developers move in and tenants and leaseholders are moved out.

 

We are very clear: we will stop the cuts to social security.

 

But we need to go further, as conference decided yesterday.

 

So when councils come forward with proposals for regeneration, we will put down two markers based on one simple principle:

 

Regeneration under a Labour government will be for the benefit of the local people, not private developers, not property speculators.

 

First, people who live on an estate that’s redeveloped must get a home on the same site and the same terms as before.

 

No social cleansing, no jacking up rents, no exorbitant ground rents.

 

And second councils will have to win a ballot of existing tenants and leaseholders before any redevelopment scheme can take place.

 

Real regeneration, yes, but for the many not the few.

 

That’s not all that has to change.

 

All parties unite in paying tribute to our public sector workers:

 

The firefighters who ran into Grenfell Tower to save lives; the health service workers caring for the maimed in the Manchester terrorist outrage; the brave police officers who confronted the attackers at London Bridge; and PC Keith Palmer who gave his life when terrorists attack our democracy.

 

Our public servants make the difference every day, between a decent and a threadbare society.

 

Everyone praises them. But it is Labour that values them and is prepared to give them the pay rise they deserve and protect the services they provide.

 

Year after year the Tories have cut budgets and squeezed public sector pay, while cutting taxes for the highest earners and the big corporations.

 

You can’t care for the nation’s health when doctors and nurses are being asked to accept falling living standards year after year.

 

You can’t educate our children properly in ever larger class sizes with more teachers than ever leaving the profession.

 

You can’t protect the public on the cheap. The police and security services must get the resources they need, not 20,000 police cuts.

 

Scrapping the public sector pay squeeze isn’t an act of charity – it is a necessity to keep our public services fully staffed and strong.

 

Not everything worthwhile costs money though.

 

Like many people, I have been moved by the Daily Mirror’s campaign to change the organ donation law.

 

There are more than 5,000 people on organ transplant waiting lists, but a shortage of donors means that in recent years only 3,500 of them get the life-saving treatments they need.

 

So that everybody whose life could be saved by an organ transplant can have the gift of life – from one human being to another.

 

The law has already been changed in Wales under Carwyn Jones’s leadership, and today I make the commitment a Labour government will do the same for England.

 

In the last couple of days John McDonnell and Rebecca Long-Bailey have set out how we are going to develop the economic plans in our manifesto to ensure that sustainable growth and good jobs reach ALL parts of the country. So that no community or region is held back. To establish regional development banks,. to invest in an industrial strategy for every region.

 

But the challenges of the future go beyond the need to turn our backs on an economic model that has failed to invest and upgrade our economy.

 

We need urgently to face the challenge of automation – robotics that could make so much of contemporary work redundant.

 

That is a threat in the hands of the greedy, but it’s a huge opportunity if it’s managed in the interests of society as a whole. We won’t reap the full rewards of these great technological advances if they’re monopolised to pile up profits for a few. But if they’re publicly managed – to share the benefits – they can be the gateway for a new settlement between work and leisure. A springboard for expanded creativity and culture. The tide of automation and technological change means re-training and management of the workforce must be centre-stage in the coming years. So Labour will build an education and training system from the cradle to the grave that empowers people. Not one that shackles them with debt. That’s why we will establish a National Education Service which will include at its core free tuition for all college courses, technical and vocational training so that no one is held back by costs and everyone has the chance to learn. That will give millions a fair chance.

 

Lifelong learning for all is essential in the economy of the future. The huge shift of employment that will take place under the impact of automation must be planned and managed. It demands the reskilling of millions of people. Only Labour will deliver that. As Angela Rayner said yesterday, our National Education Service will be run on clear principles: universal, free and empowering. This is central to our socialism for the 21st century, for the many not the few.

 

During the election I visited Derwentside College in the constituency of our new MP Laura Pidcock – one of dozens of great new MPs breathing life and energy into Parliament. They offer adult courses in everything from IT to beauty therapy, from engineering to childcare. I met apprentice construction workers. They stand to benefit from Labour’s £250 billion National Transformation Fund, building the homes people need and the new transport, energy and digital infrastructure our country needs. But changing our economy to make it work for the whole country can’t take place in isolation from changing how our country is run. For people to take control of their own lives, our democracy needs to break out of Westminster into all parts of our society and economy where power is unaccountable. All around the world democracy is facing twin threats:

 

One is the emergence of an authoritarian nationalism that is intolerant and belligerent. The second is apparently more benign, but equally insidious. It is that the big decisions should be left to the elite. That political choices can only be marginal and that people are consumers first, and only citizens a distant second. Democracy has to mean much more than that.

 

It must mean listening to people outside of election time. Not just the rich and powerful who are used to calling the shots, but to those at the sharp end who really know what’s going on. Like the Greater Manchester police officer who warned Theresa May two years ago that cuts to neighbourhood policing were risking people’s lives and security. His concerns were dismissed as “crying wolf”.

 

Like the care workers sacked when they blow the whistle on abuse of the elderly..Or the teachers intimidated when they speak out about the lack of funding for our children’s schools. Or the doctors who are ignored when they warn that the NHS crumbling before our eyes, or blow the whistle on patient safety.

 

Labour is fighting for a society not only where rewards are more fairly spread, but where people are listened to more as well by government, their local council, their employer. Some of the most shocking cases of people not being listened to must surely be the recent revelations of widespread child sex abuse. Young people – and most often young working class women – have been subjected to the most repugnant abuse. The response lies in making sure that everybody’s voice must be heard no matter who they are or what their background.

 

The kind of democracy that we should be aiming for is one where people have a continuing say in how society is run, how their workplace is run, how their local schools or hospitals are run. That means increasing the public accountability and democratization of local services that Andrew Gwynne was talking about on Monday. It means democratically accountable public ownership for the natural monopolies, with new participatory forms of management, as Rebecca Long-Bailey has been setting out.

 

It means employees given their voice at work, with unions able to represent them properly, freed of undemocratic fetters on their right to organize. I promised you two years ago that we would do politics differently. It’s not always been easy. There’s quite a few who prefer politics the old way. But let me say it again. We will do politics differently. And the vital word there is “we”.

 

Not just leaders saying things are different, but everyone having the chance to shape our democracy. Our rights as citizens are as important as our rights as consumers. Power devolved to the community, not monopolised in Westminster and Whitehall. Now let’s take it a stage further – make public services accountable to communities. Business accountable to the public, and politicians truly accountable to those we serve. Let the next Labour government will transform Britain by genuinely putting power in the hands of the people, the creative, compassionate and committed people of our country. Both at home and abroad, what underpins our politics is our compassion and our solidarity with people.

 

Including those now recovering from hurricane damage in the Caribbean, floods in South Asia and Texas. and earthquakes in Mexico. Our interdependence as a planet could not be more obvious. The environmental crisis in particular demands a common global response. That is why President Trump’s threats to withdraw from the Paris Climate Change Treaty are so alarming. There is no contradiction between meeting our climate change commitments and investing to build a strong economy based on high skill industries. In fact the opposite is the case.

 

Action on climate change is a powerful spur to investment in the green industries and jobs of the future. So long as it is managed as part of a sustainable transition. We know, tragically, that terrorism also recognises no boundaries. We have had five shocking examples in Britain this year alone.

 

Two during the course of the General Election campaign and one in my own constituency. Both Andy Burnham and Sadiq Khan – the mayors of Manchester and London – played a crucial role in bringing people together in the aftermath of those brutal attacks. The targeting of our democracy, of teenage girls at a pop concert, of people enjoying a night out, worshippers outside a mosque, commuters going to work – all of these are horrific crimes. And we all unite in both condemning the perpetrators and in our support for the emergency and security services, working to keep us safe.

 

But we also know that terrorism is thriving in a world our governments have helped to shape, with its failed states, military interventions and occupations where millions are forced to flee conflict or hunger. We have to do better and swap the knee-jerk response of another bombing campaign for long-term help to solve conflicts rather than fuel them. And we must put our values at the heart of our foreign policy. Democracy and human rights are not an optional extra to be deployed selectively.

 

So we cannot be silent at the cruel Saudi war in Yemen, while continuing to supply arms to Saudi Arabia, or the crushing of democracy in Egypt or Bahrain, or the tragic loss of life in Congo.

 

And I say this today to Aung San Suu Kyi – a champion of democracy and human rights – : end the violence now against the Rohingya in Myanmar and allow the UN and international aid agencies in to Rakhine state. The Rohingya have suffered for too long!

 

We should stand firm for peaceful solutions to international crises. Let’s tone down the rhetoric, and back dialogue and negotiations to wind down the deeply dangerous confrontation over the Korean Peninsula. And I appeal to the UN secretary general, Antonio Guterres to use the authority of his office and go to Washington and Pyongyang to kick start that essential process of dialogue. And let’s give real support to end the oppression of the Palestinian people, the 50-year occupation and illegal settlement expansion and move to a genuine two-state solution of the Israel-Palestine conflict. Britain’s voice needs to be heard independently in the world. We must be a candid friend to the United States, now more than ever.

 

The values we share are not served by building walls, banning immigrants on the basis of religion, polluting the planet, or pandering to racism. And let me say frankly – the speech made by the US President to the United Nations last week was deeply disturbing. It threatened war and talked of tearing up international agreements. Devoid of concern for human rights or universal values, it was not the speech of a world leader. Our government has a responsibility. It cannot meekly go along with this dangerous course.

 

If the special relationship means anything, it must mean that we can say to Washington: that way is the wrong way. That’s clearly what’s needed in the case of Bombardier where thousands of jobs are now at stake.

 

A Prime Minister betting our economic future on a deregulated trade deal with the US might want to explain how 220% tariffs are going to boost our exports. So let Britain’s voice be heard loud and clear for peace, justice and cooperation.

 

Conference, it is often said that elections can only be won from the centre ground. And in a way that’s not wrong – so long as it’s clear that the political centre of gravity isn’t fixed or unmovable, nor is it where the establishment pundits like to think it is. It shifts as people’s expectations and experiences change and political space is opened up. Today’s centre ground is certainly not where it was twenty or thirty years ago.

 

A new consensus is emerging from the great economic crash and the years of austerity, when people started to find political voice for their hopes for something different and better. 2017 may be the year when politics finally caught up with the crash of 2008 – because we offered people a clear choice.

 

We need to build a still broader consensus around the priorities we set in the election, making the case for both compassion and collective aspiration. This is the real centre of gravity of British politics. We are now the political mainstream. Our manifesto and our policies are popular because that is what most people in our country actually want, not what they’re told they should want. And that is why Labour is on the way back in Scotland becoming once again the champion of social justice.

 

Thank you Kezia. And whoever next leads Scottish Labour – our unifying socialist message will continue to inspire both south and north of the border.

 

That is why our party now has around twice the membership of all the other parties put together. Conference, we have left the status quo behind, but we must make the change we seek credible and effective. We have left our own divisions behind. But we must make our unity practical. We know we are campaign-ready. We must be government-ready too. Our aspirations matched by our competence.

 

During the election campaign I met and listened to people in every part of the country. Struggling single parents, young people held back by lack of opportunity. Pensioners anxious about health and social care, public servants trying to keep services together.

 

Low and middle earners, self-employed and employed, facing insecurity and squeezed living standards. But hopeful that things could change, and that Labour could make a difference. Many hadn’t voted before, or not for years past. But they put their faith in our party. We offered an antidote to apathy and despair. Let everyone understand – We will not let you down.

 

Because we listen to you, because we believe in you. Labour can and will deliver a Britain for the many not just the few. Thank you.

Thank you for that welcome. I want to start by thanking the workers, the fantastic staff at the Conference Centre and hotels, the Labour Party staff who make this possible, and the people of Liverpool who have made us feel so welcome this week. And I want to thank my family, but in particular my wife Laura. Tu eres mi fuerza y mi apoyo. Gracias Laurita. And congratulations conference, to all of you on what’s been a great conference. A conference of a Labour Party that’s ready to take charge and start the work of rebuilding our divided country.

 

This year we mark the centenary of the Representation of the People Act, which saw eight million women getting the vote for the first time, along with five and a half million working class men.

 

We now have more women members of the Labour Party than the entire membership, male and female, of the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties put together. And we mark that centenary with Jennie Formby as our new General Secretary. I have known Jennie for many years. Her integrity and her determination are real assets for our Party.

 

Since Jennie took over, we have registered significant electoral successes. In May, we saw the only bit of blue in Greater Manchester turn red as Labour won back control of Trafford Council.

 

And just for balance – as I know the Liverpool-Manchester rivalry can be a bit of a thing – there is not a single Conservative council on Merseyside either, and not a single Tory councillor in the city of Liverpool.

 

Across the country we built on the gains Labour made in the general election. In the South West we won back Plymouth, in the north, Kirklees, and we had our best council results in London since 1971.

 

In Scotland too, Labour is once again offering a message of hope and real change.

 

The choice is now clear: investment and a fairer society under Labour, or austerity under the Tories, timidly accepted by the SNP.

 

We have also been raising more money for our party. But not a penny of our funds came from a dodgy donor or a shady businessmen’s club.

 

Our money comes from hundreds of thousands of people across our country who believe in what we stand for.

 

So I don’t have to play tennis with an oligarch to keep our party organisation running. Labour trades in hope for the many, not favours for the few.

 

Our mass membership is not just a source of funds of course.

 

That membership and our millions of affiliated trade union members are the voice of their workplaces and communities, and with our new community organisers we will anchor everything we do in people’s day to day experiences.

 

That is our strength. And together, we are going to change Britain.

 

You may have noticed that not everyone is entirely happy about all this.

 

It turns out that the billionaires who own the bulk of the British press don’t like us one little bit.

 

Now it could be because we’re going to clamp down on tax dodging. Or it may be because we don’t fawn over them at white tie dinners and cocktail parties.

 

Or it could even be because Tom Watson has been campaigning for the second part of the Leveson media inquiry to be set up – something the last Prime Minister promised, but failed to deliver.

 

We must, and we will, protect the freedom of the press to challenge unaccountable power.

 

Journalists from Turkey to Myanmar and Colombia are being imprisoned, harassed or sometimes killed by authoritarian governments and powerful corporate interests just for doing their job.

 

But here, a free press has far too often meant the freedom to spread lies and half-truths, and to smear the powerless, not take on the powerful.

 

You challenge their propaganda of privilege by using the mass media of the 21st century: social media.

 

And we’ll do it in traditional ways too. On the doorsteps and in the town centres so that people know there is a Labour Party that will stand up for them and is ready to rebuild and transform Britain.

 

Next year marks the 200th anniversary of the Peterloo massacre when 15 peaceful demonstrators were killed and hundreds injured on the streets of Manchester by troops sent in by the Tories to suppress the struggle for democratic rights.

 

The great English poet Percy Shelley wrote a poem about the massacre. That was the origin of our slogan: “for the many not the few”.

 

Among those killed at Peterloo was a man named John Ashworth and a woman named Sarah Jones.

 

In the next Labour government, our very own Jon Ashworth, as Health Secretary, and Sarah Jones, as Housing Minister, will be carrying forward the struggle to protect and extend democratic rights. Hopefully without becoming martyrs in the process.

 

And we will honour the heroes of Peterloo by being true to their cause, with a Labour Party fighting for democracy and social justice against poverty, inequality and discrimination

 

If we are to get the chance to put those values into practice in government we are going to need unity to do it.

 

Our movement has achieved nothing when divided. The only winners have been the rich and the party of the rich: the Conservatives.

 

Real unity is based on the freedom to disagree and debate and then come together around democratic decisions, as we have done this week.

 

So we need to foster a much greater culture of tolerance. An end to abuse, online and in person.

 

We must learn to listen a bit more, and shout a lot less.

 

To focus on what unites us.

 

To accept losing a vote, while maintaining the right to pick up the debate again.

 

We are on a journey together and can only complete it together.

 

Our Party must speak for the overwhelming majority in our country. Labour is a broad church and can be broader still.

 

I lead in that spirit. After all, I appointed John McDonnell despite him being Liverpool fan, and even Andrew Gwynne, who supports Man City.

 

Conference, we are winning the public debate. We have defined the new common sense, and that’s where our Party can stand united.

 

Conference, this summer was tough.

 

Ours is the Party of equality for all. The Party that has pioneered every progressive initiative to root out racism from our society.

 

But conference, being anti-racist means we must listen to those communities suffering discrimination and abuse.

 

I believe we are all stronger from listening and learning from each other.

 

The Jewish people have suffered a long and terrible history of persecution and genocide. I was humbled to see a memorial to that suffering two years ago, when I visited the former Nazi concentration camp at Terezin.

 

The row over antisemitism has caused immense hurt and anxiety in the Jewish community and great dismay in the Labour Party. But I hope we can work together to draw a line under it.

 

I say this to all in the Jewish community:

 

This party, this movement, will always be implacable campaigners against antisemitism and racism in all its forms.

 

We are your ally.

 

And the next Labour government will guarantee whatever support necessary to ensure the security of Jewish community centres and places of worship, as we will for any other community experiencing hateful behaviour and physical attacks.

 

We will work with Jewish communities to eradicate antisemitism, both from our party and wider society.

 

And with your help I will fight for that with every breath I possess.

 

Anti-racism is integral to our very being. It’s part of who you all are, and it’s part of who I am.

 

So conference, we won’t accept it when we’re attacked by Tory hypocrites who accuse us of antisemitism one day, then endorse Viktor Orban’s hard right government the next. Or when they say we are racist, while they work to create a hostile environment for all migrant communities.

 

We can never become complacent about the scourge of racism. Race hate is a growing threat that has to be confronted. Not just here in Britain, but across Europe and the United States. The far right is on the rise, blaming minorities, Jews, Muslims and migrants, for the failures of a broken economic system.

 

Its victims include the Windrush generation who helped rebuild Britain after the war and were thrown under the bus by a Government that reckoned there were votes to be had by pandering to prejudice. The ‘hostile environment’ policies – shameful brainchild of the present Prime Minister – led to the scandal of British citizens being deported, detained and left destitute. That is nasty, cynical politics that demeans our country.

 

And the Tories still haven’t learned. This week they received a letter from the antisemitic and Islamophobic Hungarian government, thanking them for their solidarity, just as the rest of Europe united against it.

 

Our Party will never stay silent in the face of growing Islamophobia, whether from the far right on the streets, or the former Foreign Secretary’s disgraceful dog-whistle jibes at Muslim women. Labour will work to bring communities together. It is only through the unity of all our people that we can deliver social justice for anyone.

 

Conference, change in our country is long overdue. Every month this Government remains in power, the worse things get. Evidence of the failure of privatisation and outsourcing is piling up day after day. What has long been a scam is now a crisis.

 

Just look at the last few months: The Birmingham prison run by G4S had to be brought back into public ownership after the Chief Inspector of Prisons described it as the worst he had ever visited. The privatised probation service is on the brink of meltdown. Richard Burgon, the next Secretary of State for Justice, will end this scandal.

 

On the railways, the East Coast franchise has collapsed for the third time in a decade, bailed out by taxpayers yet again. You get on a train at Kings Cross and you never know who will be running it by the time you get to Edinburgh. Andy McDonald, our Transport Secretary, will end this shambles.

 

And the giant privateer Carillion has gone bankrupt, sunk in a sea of reckless greed, leaving hospitals half-built, workers dumped on the dole and pensions in peril, while Carillion directors continued to stuff their pockets with bonuses and dividends, and small businesses in the supply chain took heavy losses or went bust.

 

And speaking of bankruptcy, the Tories are now extending it into their own backyard. A Conservative Government and Conservative local councillors have combined to push Northamptonshire over the edge, putting vital services and those who rely on them at risk.

 

Eight years of destructive austerity and obsessive outsourcing have left other councils teetering on the precipice too, and this Government must be held to account for their social vandalism. It is Labour councils and only Labour councils that are taking every step to protect people and services and we must thank them for it.

 

Privatisation and outsourcing are now a national disaster zone. And Labour is ready to call time on this racket.

 

We will rebuild the public realm and create a genuinely mixed economy for the 21st century. And after a decade of austerity, the next Labour government will confront the challenge of rebuilding our public services.

 

This year marks the 70th anniversary of the NHS Labour’s proudest creation and it stands as a beacon for those still fighting for universal healthcare free at the point of need. Its founder, Nye Bevan, inspired by the collective health provision in his home town of Tredegar, described a free health service as “pure socialism”. And so it is. We all contribute through our taxes so that it’s there for all whenever we need it.

 

But this Conservative Government has pushed our NHS into crisis, with more people waiting longer in A&E and to see a GP and over four million people on hospital waiting lists.

 

And there is a mental health crisis too, causing real pain and anguish. A woman named Angela wrote to me recently, and she said: “My mentally ill daughter was told she would have to wait 12 months to get an appointment with an appropriate therapist. As a mother, I am at my wits end to know how to help her any more. I would hate her to become another suicide statistic.”

 

This has to stop and under Labour it will. We will deliver real parity of esteem for mental health services to protect people like Angela’s daughter.

 

And then there’s the scandal of the Tories’ £6 billion cuts to social care, leaving 400,000 fewer older people receiving care. Too many of our older people condemned to live alone and isolated, often ending up at A&E through neglect, then unable to leave hospital because it’s not safe for them.

 

Austerity is putting other strains on the NHS too, one in five homes in England are now unfit for human habitation and 120,000 children are living in temporary accommodation.

 

So as John Healey has pledged, we will put a levy on those with second homes. Think of it as a solidarity fund for those with two homes to help those without any home at all.

 

And Labour will embark on the biggest home building programme in half a century. Meanwhile, for too many people, social security has become a system of institutionalised bullying and degradation.

 

The Tories have created a ‘hostile environment’ for disabled people. Hundreds of people write to me about it every week, people like Richard who says: “My wife was diagnosed with progressive multiple sclerosis 20 years ago. A few months ago we were told that she needed to reapply for Personal Independence Payments. She had an assessment by someone who wasn’t medically trained, we have now been told that all her benefit will be stopped.”

 

Richard adds: “I have tried to be her rock but the stress and suffering I can see my wife going through is so very cruel and I have had to be put on anti-depressants.”

 

These are the human consequences of a Tory Government that puts tax cuts for the wealthy ahead of care for disabled people.

 

But Labour is ready to put fairness and humanity back at the heart of our public services. And as Diane Abbott told us yesterday, you can’t keep people safe on the cheap. That’s reflected in the fears of people like Ruth, who told me:

 

“We’ve had an increase in our council tax to pay for more police but we have no police station. The only increase we have had is in the crime rate I worry about my elderly parents’ safety in their own home.”

 

Ruth’s fears are not unfounded. Violent crime is rising while police numbers have fallen to their lowest level for 30 years. The Chief Constable of Bedfordshire says: “We do not have the resources to keep residents safe and no-one seems to be listening.”

 

Well Labour is listening. We’ll put another 10,000 police officers back on our streets, playing a vital role in tackling crime and making people safer.

 

But if we want to reduce crime, more police are only part of the solution. Every study tells us that investing in young people and communities is key and crime thrives amid economic failure. So under Labour there will be no more left-behind areas and no more forgotten communities.

 

We know the earliest years are a crucial time to open up children’s life chances. Yesterday I visited the Greenhouse nursery in Liverpool and heard their experiences. But across the country, nurseries can’t make ends meet and youth clubs and nurseries are closing.

 

Decent early years education is now at risk of becoming a privilege. Families most in need are not even entitled to it and many who are struggle to claim it, because the system’s fragmented and underfunded.

 

This Government’s limited childcare pledge has turned out to be free in name only. So today I can announce that Labour will make 30 hours a week of free childcare available to all two, three and four year olds.

 

And we will provide additional subsidised hours of childcare on top of the free 30-hour allowance, free for those on the lowest incomes and capped at £4 an hour for the rest.

 

Labour will invest in the people who care for and educate our children. We will raise the standards of childcare across the board with a 10-year plan to shift to a graduate-led workforce and improve the pay and skills of childcare staff with a new national pay scale for all early years workers starting at £10 an hour. This is an investment and a pay rise for a workforce, 98% of whom are women and 85% of whom earn around the minimum wage.

 

Patchy support for childcare is holding back too many parents and families. Universal free high quality childcare will benefit parents, families and children across our country. Driving up standards of childcare will make that vital difference for millions of our children.

 

Labour is offering a long overdue change that will transform people’s lives and meet the needs of a 21st century Britain for all. We are talking about rebuilding Britain this week But I also want to make an appeal to the older generation who built modern Britain. It was you who rebuilt our country after the war, kick-started our economy, built our NHS and created our social security system.

 

It was your generation that built the council housing, won our rights at work and made our country a better place for all. It was your work and taxes that paid for a better retirement for those who went before you

 

So we owe it you, the older generation, to rebuild Britain so you too have peace of mind and dignity. And we will fulfil that obligation with the triple lock on pensions protected along with the winter fuel allowance, a free bus pass and a national health and care service that can look after you and your families with respect. That is solidarity between the generations.

 

Conference, to rebuild our public services and our communities we are going to have to rebuild and transform our economy for the 21st century. We can no longer tolerate a set-up where the real economy, in which millions work, is just a sort of sideshow for the City of London and for banks fixated on piling up profits around the world.

 

The change we need requires new ideas and new thinking, as well as learning from those that have worked in the past and in other countries. We need to explore new forms of ownership and public enterprise, and learn from creative local initiatives such as those taken by Labour councils like Preston. And let’s take up the call from TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady to use new technologies and automation as an opportunity rather than a threat, a chance to raise living standards and give people more control of their own lives.

 

Inequality is not just a matter of incomes. It’s about having a real say too. That’s why we are not only determined to rebuild our economy, communities and public services, but also to democratise them, and change the way our economic system is run in the interests of the majority.

 

John McDonnell’s proposals for Inclusive Ownership Funds will mean workers sharing more fairly in the rewards of successful businesses. And I listened carefully to the words of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, and read the excellent Commission on Economic Justice report he was involved in, which rightly argued: “economic justice needs to be hard-wired into the way the economy works”.

 

The 19th century Chartist leader and poet Ernest Jones wrote:

 

And what we get, and what we give,

 

We know, and we know our share;

 

We’re not too low the cloth to weave,

 

But too low the cloth to wear.

 

He was making the point that workers know the reality and injustice of their position. Labour believes a worker’s position is on the board. That’s why we’re proposing to give the workforce of all large UK businesses the right to elect a third of the seats on the board, giving employees a genuine voice and a stake, shifting the balance at work in favour of the wealth creators, improving both decision-making and productivity in the process.

 

Decisions taken in boardrooms affect people’s pay, their jobs and their pensions. Workers deserve a real say in those decisions. That’s nothing for businesses to be afraid of. They should welcome the expertise and understanding that workers will bring to the company board.

 

We will rebalance power in the workplace, but I say to businesses large and small: Labour will also deliver what you need to succeed and to expand and modernise our economy. More investment in our transport, housing and digital infrastructure. More investment in education and skills, so workers are more productive. Action to save the High Street, as Rebecca Long Bailey set out yesterday. And action to deal with rip-off bills that hit us all. But most of all, commitment to a Brexit that protects job, the economy and trade, and determined opposition to one that does not.

 

Ten years ago this month, the whole edifice of greed-is-good deregulated financial capitalism, lauded for a generation as the only way to run a modern economy, came crashing to earth with devastating consequences. But instead of making essential changes to a broken economic system, the political and corporate establishment strained every sinew to bail out and prop up the system that led to the crash in the first place.

 

The price of that has not just been stagnation, wages falling for the longest period in recorded history, and almost a decade of deeply damaging cuts to public services. It’s also fuelled the growth of racism and xenophobia and has led to a crisis of democracy at home and abroad.

 

People in this country know that the old way of running things isn’t working any more. And unless we offer radical solutions, others will fill the gap with the politics of blame and division.

 

That’s why Labour speaks for the new majority, why last year we won the biggest increase in the Labour vote since 1945, and why Labour’s ideas have caught “the mood of our time”. And conference, it isn’t me saying that – it’s a former Conservative Treasury minister, Lord O’Neill. I’ve never sought to capture the mood of a Tory minister before, but let me say to his Lordship: you’re welcome, come and join us in the new political mainstream.

 

That failed economic free-for-all, which led to the crash of a decade ago, has also fuelled the global environmental crisis and hamstrung international efforts to tackle it.

 

There is no bigger threat facing humanity than climate change, and 21 years ago, Labour’s then Deputy Leader John Prescott played a prominent role in helping to secure the Kyoto Protocol. That united the world’s major economies behind an agreement to cut carbon emissions and obliged them to give poorer countries access to low-carbon technology. It was about solidarity, recognising that the air we breathe does not respect national boundaries and we all have an interest in every nation reducing emissions.

 

The contrast with the America First posturing of Donald Trump and his decision to pull out of the Paris Climate Accords could not be sharper. We only have one planet, so we must re-engage with countries seeking to walk away from Paris. But we must also lead by example. Yesterday Rebecca Long Bailey set out our plans for energy, developed with our Environment Secretary Sue Hayman, plans that are ambitious, will create hundreds of thousands of jobs and will make Britain the only developed country outside Scandinavia to be on track to meet our climate change obligations.

 

That will mean working with unions to ensure jobs and skills are protected as we move towards a low-carbon economy. And working with industry to change the way we build to train the workforce that will retrofit homes and work in the new energy industries too.

 

And I can announce today that our programme of investment and transformation to achieve a 60% reduction in emissions by 2030 will create over 400,000 skilled jobs. Good jobs based here and on union rates bringing skills and security to communities held back for too long.

 

And we will go further, with plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to zero by the middle of the century.

 

I know that sounds ambitious. It is ambitious and will be delivered with the most far-reaching programme of investment and transformation in decades

 

Labour will kick-start a Green Jobs Revolution that will help tackle climate change, provide sustainable energy for the future and create skilled jobs in every nation and region of the UK.

 

But it’s not just the economic system that is unsustainable. Britain’s relationship with the rest of the world, our foreign policy is no longer sustainable either.

 

We are entering a new fast-changing and more dangerous world including the reckless attacks in Salisbury which the evidence painstakingly assembled by the police now points clearly to the Russian state.

 

When President Trump takes the US out of the Paris accords, tries to scrap the Iran nuclear deal, moves the US embassy to Jerusalem and pursues aggressive nationalism and trade wars – he is turning his back on international cooperation and even international law.

 

We need a British government that can not only keep the country safe, but can also speak out for democratic values and human rights.

 

Today’s Conservative government continues to collude with the disastrous Saudi-led war in Yemen, turning a blind eye to evidence of war crimes and the devastating suffering of millions of civilians.

 

That’s why I was honoured to attend the vigil this week held by Liverpool’s Yemeni community, in protest against what is taking place.

 

Labour’s foreign policy will be driven by progressive values and international solidarity, led by Emily Thornberry, Kate Osamor and Nia Griffith.

 

That means no more reckless wars of intervention, like Iraq or Libya.

 

It means putting negotiations before confrontation, diplomacy before tub-thumping threats. It means championing human rights and democracy everywhere and not just where it is commercially convenient.

 

And working to resolve the world’s injustices, not standing idly by, or worse, fuelling them in the first place

 

Conference, sometimes our hopes can be betrayed. Many of us campaigned for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi, imprisoned by the Myanmar military for fighting for democracy. Today, the Myanmar military government which Aung San Suu Kyi nominally leads stands accused of grave atrocities against the Rohingya people.

 

Nearly one million people have fled to neighbouring Bangladesh and women and girls in particular face appalling violence.

 

We demand that the Myanmar government end its horrific ethnic cleansing and allows the Rohingya to rebuild their communities and their lives.

 

And let me next say a few words about the ongoing denial of justice and rights to the Palestinian people. Our Party is united in condemning the shooting of hundreds of unarmed demonstrators in Gaza by Israeli forces and the passing of Israel’s discriminatory Nation-State Law

 

The continuing occupation, the expansion of illegal settlements and the imprisonment of Palestinian children are an outrage. We support a two-state solution to the conflict with a secure Israel and a viable and secure Palestinian state.

 

But a quarter of a century on from the Oslo Accords we are no closer to justice or peace and the Palestinian tragedy continues, while the outside world stands by.

 

As my great Israeli friend Uri Avnery who died this year put it: “What is the alternative to peace? A catastrophe for both peoples”.

 

And in order to help make that two-state settlement a reality we will recognise a Palestinian state as soon as we take office.

 

We will also make a far more determined effort to help bring the terrible war in Syria to an end, a war that has led to millions of refugees, some of whom I met in Jordan this summer and whose plight Alf Dubs described so powerfully yesterday.

 

The Syrian conflict has been fuelled by the military intervention of multiple powers. And it will need those same powers to deliver a negotiated peace settlement to end the killing and allow the return of the refugees.

 

But Labour’s plans to rebuild and transform our country and its relationship with the rest of the world are having to be made against the backdrop of huge uncertainty about Brexit.

 

Labour respects the decision of the British people in the referendum. But no one can respect the conduct of the government since that vote took place.

 

We all hoped that the people’s decision would be followed by effective and responsible negotiations that would protect living standards and jobs.

 

Instead, the main negotiations have taken place between different factions of the Tory party and the only job this government is fighting for is the Prime Minister’s.

 

Theresa May used to say that ‘no deal is better than a bad deal’. Yet now, after two years of botched negotiations she is threatening the country with just that choice: a bad deal or no deal. That is a threat to our whole economy, especially our manufacturing industry and to tens of thousands of skilled jobs here in Britain.

 

Now time is running out. Companies are losing patience. In the absence of any clarity from government they are planning to relocate abroad, taking jobs and investment with them. Some have already started and I fear more will follow.

 

The Tories are well aware of this but some see Brexit as their opportunity to impose a free market shock doctrine in Britain.

 

The Prime Minister is in New York today promising that a post-Brexit Britain will offer the lowest corporation tax of all the G20 nations. Handouts to the few, paid for by the many and an already tried-and-failed strategy for boosting investment.

 

Sajid Javid has set out his plan for more tax giveaways and to rip up people’s pension rights.

 

Liam Fox is itching to scrap workers’ rights and privatise the NHS with a side order of chlorinated chicken.

 

And then there’s Jacob Rees-Mogg who has expressed his personal faith in a Brexit Britain by deciding to base his new investment fund in the Eurozone.

 

The Tory Brexiteers unite the politics of the 1950s with the economics of the 19th century, daydreaming about a Britannia that both rules the waves and waives the rules.

 

Labour’s job is now to win support for a deal that meets the needs of the country, combined with our plan to rebuild and transform Britain with investment in our people and economy.

 

Our priority is clear – we aim to get the best Brexit deal for jobs and living standards to underpin our plans to upgrade the economy and invest in every community and region.

 

That can bring people together and meet the concerns of both those who voted leave and those who voted remain.

 

Conference, the way ahead is clear. We will vote against any reduction in rights, standards or protections and oppose a deregulatory race-to-the-bottom.

 

So let me say to the country. As it stands, Labour will vote against the Chequers plan or whatever is left of it and oppose leaving the EU with no deal.

 

And it is inconceivable that we should crash out of Europe with no deal – that would be a national disaster

 

That is why if Parliament votes down a Tory deal or the government fails to reach any deal at all we would press for a General Election. Failing that, all options are on the table.

 

So let me thank Keir Starmer, the man who would lead our Brexit negotiations in government. Keir, having got agreement yesterday in this conference hall, getting one in Brussels should be a piece of cake.

 

But let me also reach out to the Prime Minister, who is currently doing the negotiating.

 

Brexit is about the future of our country and our vital interests. It is not about leadership squabbles or parliamentary posturing. If you deliver a deal that includes a customs union and no hard border in Ireland, if you protect jobs, people’s rights at work and environmental and consumer standards – then we will support that sensible deal. A deal that would be backed by most of the business world and trade unions too.

 

But if you can’t negotiate that deal then you need to make way for a party that can.

 

Conference.

 

Labour if offering a real alternative to the people of Britain. A radical plan to rebuild and transform our country.

 

An alternative to the politics of austerity, of social division and of international conflict.

 

Where the Tories have divided and ruled, we will unite and govern.

 

We represent the new common sense of our time. And we are ready to deliver on it.

 

We must speak for the people to whom Theresa May promised so much but has delivered so little.

 

And we must take our message to every town, city and village. United and ready to win, ready to govern as we were in 1945, 1964 and 1997.

 

So that when we meet this time next year let it be as a Labour government. Investing in Britain after years of austerity and neglect and bringing our country together after a decade of division.

 

Conference. Let every constituency, every community know Labour is ready. Confident in our ideas, clear in our plans, committed to rebuild Britain.

 

We don’t want to live in a society where our fellow citizens sleep rough. A strong society is one that gives all our young people the chance to realise their potential and in which all of us know if our parents need care they will get it.

 

Our task is to build that Britain and together we can.

Conference, thank you. This is an extraordinary and precarious moment in our country’s history.

The Prime Minister has been found to have acted illegally when he tried to shut down parliament. The highest court in the land has found that Boris Johnson broke the law when he tried to shut down democratic accountability at a crucial moment for our public life. 

The Prime Minister acted illegally when he tried to shut down opposition to his reckless and disastrous plan to crash out of the European Union without a deal. But he has failed. He will never shut down our democracy or silence the voices of the people.

The democracy that Boris Johnson describes as a “rigmarole” will not be stifled and the people will have their say.

Tomorrow parliament will return. The government will be held to account for what it has done. Boris Johnson has been found to have misled the country. This unelected Prime minister should now resign.

That would make him the shortest serving British Prime Minister in history and rightly so. His is a born-to-rule government of the entitled who believe that the rules they set for everyone else don’t apply to them.

That’s what today’s Supreme Court judgement spells out with brutal clarity. There was no reason - “let alone a good reason”, the judges concluded, for the Prime Minister to have shut down parliament. Conference, he thought he could do whatever he liked just as he always does. He thinks he’s above us all. He is part of an elite that disdains democracy. He is not fit to be prime minister. Let me quote the Supreme Court’s conclusion: "Unlawful, null and of no effect and should be quashed" - they’ve got the prime minister down to a tee. 

This crisis can only be settled with a general election. That election needs to take place as soon as this government’s threat of a disastrous No Deal is taken off the table. That condition is what MPs passed into law before Boris Johnson illegally closed down parliament 

It’s a protection that’s clearly essential. After what has taken place no one can trust this government and this Prime Minister not to use this crisis of their own making and drive our country over a No Deal cliff edge in five weeks’ time. The Prime Minister has no mandate for a No Deal crash-out which is opposed by a majority of the public. It would force up food prices cause shortages of medicines and threaten peace in Northern Ireland thus destroying the work of the Good Friday Agreement. 

The battle over No Deal isn’t a struggle between those who want to leave the EU and those who want to remain. It’s about a small rightwing group who are trying to hijack the referendum result to rip up our rights and protections to shift even more power and wealth to those at the top. 

Under the cover of No Deal they want to sell off what’s left of our public services strip away the regulations that keep us safe while slashing corporate taxes even further. That would mean a race to the bottom in standards and workers’ rights to create an offshore tax haven for the super-rich. And they want all of this locked in with a one-sided free trade deal that would put our country at the mercy of Donald Trump. 

That’s why a No Deal Brexit is really a Trump Deal Brexit. That would be the opposite of taking back control. It would be handing our country’s future to the US president and his America First policy. Of course Trump is delighted to have a compliant British prime minister in his back pocket. A Trump Deal Brexit would mean US corporations getting the green light for a comprehensive takeover of our public services 

I am not prepared to stand by while our NHS is sacrificed on the altar of US big business or any other country’s big business. And in the coming general election Labour will be the only major UK party ready to put our trust in the people to have the final say on Brexit.

We need to get Brexit sorted and do it in a way that doesn’t leave our economy or our democracy broken. The Tories want to crash out without a deal and the Liberal Democrats want to cancel the country’s largest ever democratic vote with a parliamentary stitch-up. 

Labour will end the Brexit crisis by taking the decision back to the people with the choice of a credible leave deal alongside remain. That’s not complicated Labour is a democratic party that trusts the people. After three and a half years of Tory Brexit failure and division, the only way we can settle this issue and bring people back together is by taking the decision out of the hands of politicians and letting the people decide.

So within three months of coming to power a Labour government will secure a sensible deal based on the terms we have long advocated and discussed with the EU trade unions and businesses: a new customs union a close single market relationship and guarantees of rights and protections. And within six months of being elected we will put that deal to a public vote alongside remain. And as a Labour prime minister I pledge to carry out whatever the people decide. 

Only a vote for Labour will deliver a public vote on Brexit. Only a Labour government will put the power back into the hands of the people. We can bring our country and our people together. Let’s stop a No Deal Brexit and let the people decide.

We must get Brexit settled not least because Brexit has dominated our politics for too long. The coming election will be a once-in-a-generation chance for real change. A chance to kick out Boris Johnson’s government of the privileged few and put wealth and power in the hands of the many. 

A chance to give our NHS, schools and police the money they need by asking those at the top to pay their fair share. A chance to take urgent action on the environment before it’s too late for our children. And a chance to end the Brexit crisis by letting the people, not the politicians have the final say.

 

In a shameless bid to turn reality on its head Boris Johnson’s born-to-rule Tories are now claiming to be the voice of the people. A political party that exists to protect the establishment is pretending to be anti-establishment. Johnson and his wealthy friends are not only on the side of the establishment they are the establishment. They will never be on the side of the people when supporting the people might hit them and their super-rich sponsors where it hurts – in their wallets and offshore bank accounts.

 Let me send this message to Boris Johnson: If you still lead your party into an election we know your campaign will be swimming in cash. But we’ve got something you haven’t. People in their hundreds of thousands rooted in all communities and all age groups across Britain and we’ll meet you head on with the biggest people-powered campaign this country has ever seen - and if we win, it will be the people who win.

Labour stands for the real change Britain needs after years of Conservative cuts and failure. We will rebuild and transform our country so that no one is held back and no community left behind.

We live in a country where top chief executives now pocket in just two-and-a-half days what the average worker earns in a whole year. Where Thomas Cook bosses were able to fill their pockets with unearned bonuses, while their workers face redundancy and 150,000 holidaymakers are stranded because of their failure.

We’ve had the greatest slump in wages since the first steam trains were built. To share wealth, we need to share power. And that's what we’ll do in government with bold, radical measures such as giving the workforce a 10 per cent stake in large companies, paying a dividend of up to £500 a year to every employee.

We’ll bring about the biggest extension of rights for workers our country has ever seen. We’ll scrap zero-hours contracts; introduce a £10 living wage - including for young people from the age of 16; give all workers equal rights from their first day in the job; take action on the gender, disability and ethnicity pay gaps; and introduce flexible working time for workers experiencing the menopause.

It’s Labour that will get more money into your pocket, rather than line the pockets of multi-millionaires. And we will give people a democratic voice at work, allowing them to secure better terms and pay for themselves.

Within the first 100 days of our government we will scrap the Tory Trade Union Act. And by the way, Labour will never tell people they have to work until they’re 75. A Labour government will mean better wages, greater security, and more say. Putting power in the hands of the people. And we’ll bring rail, mail, water and the national grid into public ownership so the essential services that we all rely on are run by and for the public not for profit.

Yesterday I met Luis Walker, a wonderful nine-year-old boy. Luis is living with cystic fibrosis. Every day he needs at least four hours of treatment and is often in hospital keeping him from school and his friends. Luis’ life could be very different with the aid of a medicine called Orkambi. But Luis is denied the medicine he needs because its manufacturer refuses to sell the drug to the NHS for an affordable price.

Luis, and tens of thousands of others suffering from illnesses such as cystic fibrosis hepatitis C and breast cancer are being denied life-saving medicines by a system that puts profits for shareholders before people’s lives.

Labour will tackle this. We will redesign the system to serve public health - not private wealth - using compulsory licensing to secure generic versions of patented medicines. We’ll tell the drugs companies that if they want public research funding then they’ll have to make their drugs affordable for all. And we will create a new publicly owned generic drugs manufacturer to supply cheaper medicines to our NHS saving our health service money and saving lives. We are the party that created the NHS. Only Labour can be trusted with its future.

My parents’ generation fought hard to establish the principle of a universal health service owned and run by the public. They left it in our trust. It’s our duty to defend it. We will end the sell-offs and privatisation. Our NHS is not for sale not to Trump or anyone else.

And Conference, we will make prescriptions free in England, as they have been in Wales since 2007 when charges were abolished by the Welsh Labour government.

And we need to talk about social care as well. When older people, who have paid into the system all their lives need a little help we shouldn’t deny it to them. So we will introduce free personal care for those who need it as the first step in our plan for a National Care Service. 

Government should provide a platform that allows everyone to reach their full potential. That’s the principle behind the National Education Service that the next Labour government will create. Free education for everyone throughout life as a right not a privilege. No more university tuition fees. Free childcare and a new Sure Start programme. Free vocational and technical education. And free training for adults.

And when it comes to paying for our public services Labour will raise tax but only for the top five per cent. The Tories will cut taxes for highest paid. Labour will make the big corporations pay the tax they owe. The Tories will give them tax breaks. 

How can it be right that the largest companies and wealthiest individuals are being given tax cuts while at the other end mums are dads are missing meals so they can feed their kids? Shouldn’t it be a source of shame that the United Nations - the United Nations - had to take our government to task this year over the shocking fact that 14 million people are living in poverty in the fifth richest country in the world? Let me quote directly from the UN report. It said:

"Much of the glue that has held British society together since the Second World War has been deliberately removed and replaced with a harsh and uncaring ethos."

Doesn’t that sum up the Tories: a harsh and uncaring ethos?

Labour will stand up for tenants, for underpaid workers, and for all those struggling to make ends meet. We’ll start the largest council house building programme in a generation. Because Labour puts people before privilege. We will end austerity and help rebuild your community. We’ll restore local pride, revive the high streets that are the centres of our communities and reverse the cuts that have caused violent crime to double.

Labour will get our economy working in every town city and region with a record investment blitz, and we’ll boost the devolved budgets in Wales and Scotland. We’ll upgrade our transport energy and broadband infrastructure with 250 billion pounds of investment. And breathe new life into every community, with a further 250 billion of capital for businesses and co-ops. Investment on a scale our country has never known, bringing good new jobs and fresh growth to where you live. 

That’s the scale of Labour’s ambition.

No more tinkering around the edges. Because these aren’t abstract numbers on a spreadsheet. They stand for an economic transformation that will change your daily life. 

Let me give you a concrete example of what it will mean. Labour will invest in Crossrail for the North to link our great Northern cities, from Liverpool to Hull and up to Newcastle in the North East. And we’ll restore the bus services that have been cut leaving people isolated from their communities.

For decades we’ve been told the economy is beyond our control, an irresistible force that can lay waste to entire communities while we can only watch on, passive.

But it’s not true.

With a serious industrial strategy and a radical Labour government, the economy can be a tool in our hands rather than the master of our fate. And with a government that’s prepared to intervene we can prioritise the things that matter most.

Which is precisely what our times demand, because nothing matters more than the climate emergency. That means taking on the big polluters and wealth hoarders who profit from the current system. Bringing our emissions down to net zero won’t happen by itself. It will only be possible with massive public investment in renewable energy and green technology.

That’s not a burden. It’s an opportunity to kickstart a Green Industrial Revolution that will create hundreds of thousands of high-skill high-wage unionised jobs as we triple solar power, double onshore wind and bring about a seven-fold increase in offshore wind projects.

And that’s why we announced today that the next Labour will build three new battery plants in South Wales, in Stoke-on-Trent and Swindon.

The climate and environmental emergency we all face is an issue of global security. We’re seeing ice caps melting, coral reefs dissolving, wildfires in the Arctic Circle and Brazil’s far-right leader President Bolsonaro fiddles while the Amazon burns.

Real security doesn’t come from belligerent posturing or reckless military interventions. It comes from international cooperation and diplomacy, and addressing the root causes of the threats we all face. Our foreign policy will be defined by our commitment to human rights and international justice, not enthusiasm for foreign wars that fuel - rather than combat - terrorism and insecurity 

So it really beggars belief that this week Boris Johnson is openly talking about sending troops to Saudi Arabia as part of the increasingly dangerous confrontation between Saudi Arabia and Iran, in an apparent bid to appease Donald Trump.

Have we learned nothing?

Time and again over the last two decades the British political and military establishment has made the wrong call on military intervention in the wider Middle East, spreading conflicts rather than settling them.

We must not make those mistakes again. Under a Labour government Britain will be a force for peace and international justice.

 

Dangerous and wrong-headed international interventions have also exacerbated community tensions at home. When Boris Johnson compared Muslim women to letterboxes or bank robbers, it wasn’t a flippant comment, it was calculated to play on people’s fears. Displays of racism, Islamophobia or antisemitism are not signs of strength, but of weakness.

This Conservative government as well as the far-right has fuelled division in our society. They’ll blame people’s problems on the migrant worker trying to make a better life. They’ll blame it on the mum who’s struggling on Universal Credit. They’ll blame it on Muslims, on young people, on anyone but themselves and their backers, who benefit from a grossly unequal and rigged system. 

Labour will do the opposite, we will bring people together. A Labour government will transform our economy and communities. We stand not just for the 52 per cent or the 48 per cent but for the 99 per cent.

The Labour government I lead will take on those who really run our country - the financial speculators, tax dodgers and big polluters - so the real wealth creators, the people of this country, can have the jobs, services and futures they deserve.

When Labour wins, the nurse wins, the pensioner wins, the student wins, the office worker wins, the engineer wins. We all win. 

The politics we stand for is about giving people who don’t have a lot of money and don’t have friends in high places the chance to take control of their own lives. My job, as Leader, and our job as the Labour Party is to champion those people, to stand up for those communities and deliver the real change our country needs.

And I want to take this opportunity to say thank you to every one of them as well as all the members of our party our elected representatives our trade unions for making our party such a strong and welcoming place in every community every workplace and every part of the country.

I have what might be considered a different view of leadership from the one people are used to. I do believe leaders should have strong principles that people can trust. But leaders must also listen and trust others to play their part. Because there are leaders in every community driving change. Many of them would never dream of calling themselves leaders, but they are.

I’m thinking of the mother who campaigns on behalf of the residents in her block to get the damp removed, and the fast food worker organising their colleagues to demand a living wage. It’s those leaders Labour is now working with and supporting. Because our philosophy is to trust the people and give them the power to make change in every community and workplace, not hand more power to politicians.

And that’s why, if the British people elect a Labour government in the coming election I will be proud to be your Prime Minister. Because I will be a different kind of Prime Minister. Not there from a sense of born-to-rule entitlement. Certainly not there for some personal power trip. There because I want to put government on your side. To put power and wealth into your hands. There because I believe government should work for you.

And together, we can go beyond defending the gains made by previous generations. It’s time we started building a country fit for the next generation. Where young people don’t fear the future but look forward with confidence and hope. 

The tide is turning. The years of retreat and defeat are coming to an end. Together, we’ll take on the privileged, and put the people in power. Thank you.