Abstract
	This study has examined the influence of journalistic norms in the framing of climate change in UK national newspaper coverage. Research has shown that framing has the potential to greatly influence the audience in the formation of public opinion (Kahneman, & Tversky, 1984; Nisbet, & Goidel, 2007) Previous research has also shown that the application of journalistic norms have a significant impact in the framing of issues (Boykoff, 2011). This study has examined the impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms in UK national newspaper coverage of climate change. The selection of ‘Climategate’ was due to the academic research gap surrounding this triggering event which was significant as there was a rise of a climate sceptic discourse (Nerlich, 2010). The impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms was critically examined in this study through a quantitative statistical analysis of seven UK national newspapers to see if the changing application of journalistic norms before and after ‘Climategate’ was significant. This study included both broadsheet and tabloid newspapers. Tabloid newspapers are often overlooked by academic research despite potentially greater impact on popular opinion (Boykoff, 2008). The findings from this study were that ‘Climategate’ had a significant impact in the application of journalistic norms in nearly all of the UK newspapers. The triggering event of ‘Climategate’ had a significant impact on the application of journalistic norms with the increase of personalisation and balance in most newspapers in the study, which were used by climate sceptics to create public doubt in climate science and distrust in climate scientists.      
 
Introduction
	This dissertation will examine the media framing of climate change and the influence that journalistic norms have on the shaping of coverage in UK national newspapers with a specific focus on the impact of ‘Climategate’. Media framing is the process where the selection of information and discourses used in portraying an issue forms the public perception of an issue (Muschert, 2009; Nisbet, 2009; Scheufele, 1999). Journalistic norms are normative pressures upon journalists which influence them in their selection and the presentation of news stories (Boykoff, 2011; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004; Pettenger, 2007). 
The role of the media in communicating the issue of climate change is important to study as the media has an essential role of communicating information to the public (Cohen, & Young, 1982; Herman, & Chomsky, 2008). This dissertation will be examining both UK broadsheet and tabloid newspapers. Broadsheet newspapers are argued by Carvalho (2007) to have a greater political influence despite having a much smaller daily circulation figures than tabloids. The greater political influence is due to policy makers and politicians using broadsheets as their source of news, and therefore, the discourses used by broadsheet newspapers have a greater political impact (Carvalho, 2007). Consequently, tabloids have not been considered important in the examination of climate change coverage (Boykoff, 2007; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007; Doulton, & Brown, 2009). 
However, there is a significant difference in daily circulation figures between broadsheets and tabloids. Boykoff (2008, p. 551) highlights that a tabloid daily circulation is “… as much as ten times higher than their counterparts in broadsheet newspaper readership”. The difference in daily circulation can be seen in the example of the broadsheet newspaper The Independent which had a daily circulation of 186,557 in November 2009 while the tabloid newspaper The Sun had a daily circulation of 2,958,502 (The Guardian, 2009). The daily circulation is argued by Boykoff (2008, p. 551) to be inaccurate for the tabloid representation of the readership as tabloids are more likely to be “… ‘shared’ in public spaces (e.g. on the train) and in the work place…” which could mean that the daily circulation figures only represent around half of the daily readership. Therefore, tabloids have a stronger influence in the formation of public opinion in wider society than broadsheets. The greater influence of discourses from tabloids in society means that tabloid newspapers have been included in this study.     
	To examine the influence of journalistic norms on the framing of climate change this dissertation will critically examine the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ and the impact it had upon the application of journalistic norms in UK newspaper coverage. A triggering event is an event that causes media attention or a sudden growth in the media coverage of an issue (Keown-McMullan, 1997). A triggering event can be caused by a range of different types of events with examples being natural disasters or domestic political events (Boykoff, 2010; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007; Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005) The triggering event of ‘Climategate’ was the leaking of emails that were hacked from the University of East Anglia Climate Research Unit on the 17th November, 2009 (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010; RealClimate, 2010). The term ‘Climategate’ was used by climate sceptics to frame a discourse attacking public trust in climate scientists through the release of over a thousand personal emails which included emails where colloquial terms such as ‘trick’ was used and represented by climate sceptics as dishonesty by climate scientists  (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010).
	The impact of ‘Climategate’ caused a revival of the climate sceptic discourse in climate change newspaper coverage which Boykoff (2007) showed to have been almost entirely wiped out in UK broadsheet newspaper reporting. There was also research by Boykoff and Mansfield (2008) that showed that the climate sceptic discourse remained to a limited extent in UK tabloid newspapers. The impact that ‘Climategate’ had on the undermining of the scientific consensus in popular opinion in the UK can be seen in a Populus poll which asked ‘whether climate change is happening and is largely manmade’(BBC, 2010). 26% agreed in February 2010 where as a previous survey asking the same question in November, 2009 showed that 41% agreed (BBC, 2010; Nerlich, 2010). However, despite the potential impact of ‘Climategate’ there has been very little academic research (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010), leaving a research gap. 
	Therefore, to examine the impact of ‘Climategate’ in UK national newspaper coverage of climate change, this dissertation will seek to answer the following research question: 
To what extent has ‘Climategate’ impacted the application of journalistic norms in the UK national newspaper framing of climate change?  
	In answering this research question this dissertation will seek to accept or reject the following research hypothesis:
‘Climategate’ had a major impact in the application of journalistic norms in UK national newspaper coverage of climate change.
	This dissertation will be structured in five chapters. The first chapter will explore the literature of media framing and the influence of the media in setting the agenda of public debate. To successfully explore the literature of media framing and agenda setting this chapter will seek to answer the subsidiary research question, ‘Does the mass media influence public debate of issues by the way that they are framed in media reports?’ The second chapter will examine the impact that journalist norms have in shaping newspaper coverage. This chapter will answer the subsidiary research question, ‘To what extent do journalistic norms impact on the shaping of media content?’ The third chapter will evaluate the importance of media framing and the impact of journalistic norms on the coverage of climate change. To evaluate the framing of climate change, this chapter will seek to answer the subsidiary research question, ‘Has the effective communication of climate change to the general populace been undermined by competing journalistic norms in the framing of the issue?’
	The fourth chapter will discuss the methodology used in this study of UK national newspaper coverage of climate change and how the application of journalistic norms has been impacted by ‘Climategate’. This chapter will also detail the hypotheses that this study will seek to accept or reject. The fifth chapter will critically examine the results and seek to accept or reject the hypotheses of the study. Finally, this dissertation will have a discussion and conclusion section which will seek to accept or reject the overall research hypothesis.  
Chapter 1: Media framing of issues and the consequence of agenda setting
	This chapter will explore the literature of media framing and agenda setting. To examine the literature of media framing and agenda setting, this chapter will answer the subsidiary research question, ‘Does the mass media influence public debate of issues by the way that they are framed in media reports?’ Media framing is a process where media producers select “… an interpretive framework for the story, which facilitates the discourse about an issue” (Muschert, 2009, p. 165). Agenda setting is a key aspect of power as by setting the agenda certain issues or aspects of an issue are debated, while those not included do not “… enter the political arena” (Bachrach, & Baratz, 1962, p. 950). Firstly, this chapter will examine the importance of analysing the mass media framing of issues, and secondly, evaluate the consequences of framing in setting the agenda of public debate. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that the framing of issues by media reporting is significant in influencing public debate as the framing is unavoidable and inherently sets the agenda.  
	The influence of the media framing of issues is significant as the social reality is constructed through the discourse selected “… that readers or viewers use to interpret and discuss public events” (Scheufele, 1999, p. 105). Framing is an inherent aspect of media communication as Nisbet (2009, p. 15) argues that there is simply “… no such thing as unframed information…”. Instead Nisbet (2009, p. 15) argues that “frames are interpretive storylines…” which communicate “… why an issue might be a problem, who or what might be responsible for it, and what should be done about it.” The framing of issues by the media is particularly powerful in setting the agenda of public discussion, which is influenced through the selection of discourses used, or by focusing on particular aspects of an issue, and establishing causal links between factors (Mercado, 2012; Nelson, Clawson, & Oxley, 1997).
The selective coverage by journalists in the framing of issues allows for selected discourses to frame public debate (Mercado, 2012; Nisbet, & Scheufele, 2009). The discourses used in the framing of issues is important as it constructs a shared understanding of events through the language used (Howarth, 2000). The discourse used in the framing of issues is important as language and symbols can be used to maintain the social order, or used to create public support for policies that support elite interests (Chomsky, 2002; Herman, & Chomsky, 2008; Howarth, 2000; Mills, 1997). 
The influence on public opinion that the media has within a democratic system means that the selective portrayal of an issue can cause greater public concern and popular demands for government actions (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010). An example is the portrayal of immigration by the mass media which can be portrayed within a negative frame such as a focus upon crime committed “… at a volume disproportionate to their actual occurrence in society…” (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010, p. 362). Within the US, the National Association of Hispanic Journalists highlights that immigration and crime have both been used to frame “… 36 per cent of all network news stories covering Latinos” (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010, p. 362). The framing of these issues results in the public viewing immigration as a far greater problem to society as other issues are pushed from the public agenda (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010; Pralle, 2009).
The representation of issues in the media to produce a greater public focus is important “because we are cognitively limited…” meaning that there is only a finite number of issues that can preoccupy “… the forefront of our minds” (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010). Therefore, gaining media attention is important for an issue in order to be seen as relevant by the wider public (Gavin, 2010). The importance of gaining media attention by groups protesting over an issue is summarised by Jordan (1998, p. 327) as a “protest without media coverage is like a mime performance in the dark: possible but fairly pointless” (Gavin, 2010, p. 461). However, coverage itself does not necessarily create public support as framing is key in the public response to an issue (Scheufele, & Tewksbury, 2007).
The language used in coverage is important as it activates a series of frames already developed in the consciousness of the viewer or reader (Entman, 1993; Lakoff, 2010). These developed frames process issues thematically which links to a direct frame and also “… closely related concepts such as categories, scripts, or stereotypes connote mentally stored clusters of ideas that guide individuals’ processing of information” (Dunaway, Branton, & Abrajano, 2010; Entman, 1993, p. 53). These thematic frames are argued by Lakoff (2010, p. 71) to be used for “all of our knowledge…” and “… structures are physically realized in neural circuits in the brain”. This means that all human thought uses frames with language having an important capability to activate frames (Lakoff, 2010).
The use of language for activating frames also requires the language to appeal to emotions to influence reactions to the issue in public debate, as Lakoff (2010) argues that emotion is a key aspect in decisions making. The focus on emotion is significant as Lakoff (2010, p. 72) argues that the concept of reasoning from the ‘enlightenment’ is flawed as human reasoning is not a “… conscious, unemotional, logical, abstract, universal…”. Instead Lakoff (2010, p. 72) argues that “real reason is: mostly unconscious (98%); requires emotion; uses the “logic” of frames, metaphors, and narratives…”. Therefore, simply communicating facts are not enough to produce a demand for action on an issue or change somebody’s stance as Lakoff (2010) argues that there needs to be established frames to process the information. 
This form of reasoning  highlights the importance of how information can be framed to influence peoples’ decisions (Lakoff, 2010). The way that framing influences decision making is evidenced in the study carried out by Kahneman and Tversky (1984) which showed that the emphasis on certain aspects of an issue in reporting had an impact in the decision making of the audience (Entman, 1993). The research by Kahneman and Tversky (1984) was an experiment where the participants were given a statement of an imaginary situation and then offered two solutions to the problem (Entman, 1993). These were presented as:
“If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved. If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 600 people will be saved and a two-thirds probability that no people will be saved. Which of the two programs would you favour?” (Entman, 1993, p. 53; Kahneman, & Tversky, 1984, p. 343). 
The result from the experiment by Kahneman and Tversky (1984) was a majority of 72 per cent of participants selecting Program A (Entman, 1993). However, when the framing was changed in the following experiment with Program C and Program D being framed as:
“If Program C is adopted, 400 people will die. If Program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability that nobody will die and a two-thirds probability that 600 people will die” (Entman, 1993, p. 54; Kahneman, & Tversky, 1984, p. 343). 
The results of the second experiment showed that by simply changing the frame from ‘people will be saved’ to ‘people will die’ had the effect of reversing the choice made by the participants in the initial experiment (Entman, 1993). This meant in the second experiment that 78 per cent selected Program D in contrast to the previous selection where the identical program only received 28 per cent (Entman, 1993). Therefore, framing can directly impact how an audience processes social reality (Entman, 1993). 
Framing is a selective process which has the benefit of reducing the complexity of an issue to meet the requirement of limited space in print or limited time for broadcasts to present an issue in a way that “… makes them accessible to the lay audiences…” and as a result it frames the news reports’ language to activate pre-established frames (Scheufele, & Tewksbury, 2007, p. 12). The influence of frames in reasoning is important as the dominant political frames of ideology become strengthened over time but Parenti (1993) argues that these dominant frames can be challenged when a ‘dissident view’ is introduced and can cause people to re-evaluate their acceptance of the ‘prevailing messages’ (Lakoff, 2010). The challenge from dissident views is potentially limited as Lakoff (2010, p. 72) highlights that the frames and language of the dominant ideology can become normalised in everyday usage and more problematic for challenging as “… the repetition of ideological language will strengthen the circuits for that ideology…”.  
However, while the use of language is particularly important in activating frames, Lakoff (2010, p. 73) argues that “words themselves are not frames”. Therefore, trying to change the word choice in the presentation of information or through the use of slogans will have a minimal effect on people if they do not have the “… systems of frames built up over a long period…”. (Lakoff, 2010, p. 73). There is also the problem that previously developed frames can contradict the frames that need to be developed to understand an complex issue such as climate change (Lakoff, 2010). As a result of the potentially contradicting frames that require development to the already well developed frames, an audience can “… ignore the relevant facts” that do not fit into the pre-existing developed frames (Lakoff, 2010, p. 74). 
The media coverage can select a discourse that activates frames which can reinforce an individual’s opinion on an issue or affect the formation of the opinion through the activation of previously developed frames (Lakoff, 2010; Seaton, 1997). The use of frames by the media means that the media can set the agenda for public debate (Kuypers, 2002; Seaton, 1997). An example of the impact of media framing in the setting of the agenda for public debate can be seen in the coverage of the controversial issue of embryonic stem cell research (Nisbet, & Goidel, 2007). Research by Nisbet and Goidel (2007) into the impact of the framing of coverage of the embryonic stem cell research focused on two main discourse frames. The coverage was framed as either an issue to ‘Christian morality’ or ‘social and economic progress’. The result from Nisbet and Goidel (2007) research showed that individuals who viewed media outlets which took the discourse frame of an issue to ‘Christian morality’ were more likely to have a negative view of stem cell research, while those viewing media outlets which used the frame that stem cell research was social and economic progress were more likely to be supportive. Therefore, the framing of a controversial issue can influence public opinion.    
	In conclusion, the framing by the mass media is unavoidable as all information is framed. Previous research by Kahneman and Tversky (1984) has highlighted the impact that a small change in the framing of an issue can impact upon decision making, as well as research by Nisbet and Goidel (2007) that showed the selected portrayal of an issue from a media outlet can impact on the formation of public opinion. This is due to the discourses used to frame coverage of an issue as language activates developed frames used for an individual’s reasoning which shape an individual’s opinion to an event or issue. Therefore, the consequence of media framing means that the media coverage inherently sets the agenda of public debate.  
Chapter 2: The impact of journalistic norms on the shaping of media content
This chapter will explore the literature of journalistic norms and the impact that these have on the shaping of the news content. To explore the impact of journalistic norms on the framing of news coverage, this chapter will answer the subsidiary research question, ‘To what extent do the journalistic norms impact on the shaping of media content?’ This chapter will firstly examine the journalistic norms specifically focusing on the competition between the journalistic norms of objectivity and commercial norms. Objectivity is argued by Lowrey (2003, p. 125) to have been seen as key to the “… ethical belief systems” in journalism, as the process of objective journalistic research and reporting is key for informing the public with balanced reporting (Gans, 1979, p. 183). Commercial normative pressures impact the framing of news coverage in order to sell news as entertainment (Lowrey, 2003; Parenti, 1993). Journalistic norms are important as they have the impact of socialising journalists to report the news in certain ways, as the norms are seen as “… proper behaviour” (Pettenger, 2007, p. 10). Secondly, the consequences that journalistic norms have on the shaping of media content will be critically evaluated. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that journalistic norms have a great impact on the framing of media coverage, but these norms are in competition with each other.
There is a significant difference in the application between broadsheet and tabloid newspapers of the professional journalistic norms of objectivity and commercial norms. Broadsheet newspapers use the journalistic norms of objectivity to a far greater extent than tabloids, as broadsheets focus upon producing the image of objectivity (Boykoff, 2007; Doulton, & Brown, 2009; Lowrey, 2003). In contrast tabloid newspapers are driven more by commercial norms, and as a result, take a far more emotive and sensationalist approach rather than attempting to produce the image of objectivity (Boykoff, 2008). A tabloid journalist summarised the production of a tabloid newspapers’ as “Everyone is much more loose, it is like working for a newspaper but also making a magazine” (Deuze, 2005, p. 874). Therefore, the extent that broadsheets and tabloids differ in the application of the journalistic norms impact upon both the selection of issues for news story coverage and how they are portrayed (Boykoff, 2011).
However, the changes in long term media focus on issues is argued by Downs (1972) to be due to the ‘issue attention cycle’ which suggests an issue enters into a cycle of media attention and eventually loses media attention as new issues become dominant. The ‘issue-attention cycle’ was developed by Downs (1972) to explain the shifts in public attention with the development and loss of attention on certain issues in American society (Peters, & Hogwood, 1985). The approach of the ‘issue attention cycle’ is in five stages. The first stage is ‘the pre-problem stage’ where the issue exists but is not yet the subject of public attention (Downs, 1972). The second stage is ‘alarmed discovery’, where there is a sudden growth of public attention and enthusiasm for political action (Downs, 1972). 
	The pressure for a solution to an issue leads into the third stage in the cycle where there is realisation that a solution to the problem is perceived as having a cost too great to solve (Downs, 1972). A result of the realisation can lead to technology being seen as potential future solution  so that the immediate cost of solving the issue can be avoided (Downs, 1972). This realisation leads to the fourth stage of the cycle where public interest in the issue declines due to either the impact of discouragement due to the difficulties or others becoming bored with the issue (Downs, 1972). After public interest decreases the issue moves into the final stage of the cycle where the issue is no longer in the main attention of the public (Downs, 1972).
	However, the issue attention cycle is flawed as media coverage is affected by popular opinion and does not consider the role of the media in setting the agenda for public debate (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007). Research carried out by Brossard, Shanahan and McComas (2004) contrasted climate change coverage between US and French media outlets, and the result suggested that the issue attention cycle is not a universal theory, as the coverage of issues were cultural constructed cycles dependent upon short term journalistic norms (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007). The differences in the cultural construction of the issue attention cycle is argued by Peters and Hogwood (1985) to be due to the original study by Downs (1972) being based upon his observations of US media coverage. Therefore, the culturally constructed nature of the ‘issue-attention cycle’ means that journalistic norms shaping the media framing of issues. The potential impact will be examined in the following section. 
	The journalistic goal of objectivity is seen as key for producing the professional standard of journalism with the focus upon the “… gathering, verification, and dissemination of facts…” through balanced reporting (Lowrey, 2003, p. 125). The goal of objectivity is argued by Parenti (1993) to be key in producing the image of credibility and gaining trust from the public that the media source is unbiased. The journalistic norm of balance  is a key aspect to this process, as balance gives a voice to ‘officials’ in differing sides of an issue (Boykoff, 2011). There is a secondary benefit for the journalist that balance gives ‘validity’ to media reports when the reporter themselves has a potentially limited understanding of complex political or scientific events (Boykoff, 2011). Therefore, the journalistic norm of balance has a key role in producing the image that media outlets are objective and trustworthy sources (Boykoff, 2011; Parenti, 1993). 
Another aspect of achieving the image of objectivity is the reliance on official sources that are publically recognised sources which Boykoff (2011) calls the ‘authority-order’ norm. These sources come from governmental actors, businesses and non-governmental groups (Boykoff, 2011). The impact of the reliance on official sources is that the portrayal by the media can fall into established elite discourses rather than showing a wider view over an issue (Boykoff, 2011; Herman, & Chomsky, 2008). The reliance on the ‘authority-order’ norm is argued by Herman and Chomsky (2008) to be also due to the commercial demands and economic constraints on the newspapers (Boykoff, 2011). The commercial pressures require a steady flow of raw news, but the costs of having “… reporters and cameras at all places where important stories may break” is economically unfeasible, and instead the media outlet has to “… concentrate their resources where significant news often occurs, where important rumours and leaks abound, and where regular press conferences are held” (Herman, & Chomsky, 2008, pp. 17-18). Therefore, authority-order does not produce objective coverage, but instead allows for the production of an image of objectivity.
	However, the journalistic aim of the image of objectivity through the norm of balance and authority-order is in conflict with other journalistic norms, in particular the commercial norms of the media which seek to sell news as entertainment (Lowrey, 2003; Parenti, 1993). These commercial norms are argued by Boykoff (2011) to be ‘personalisation’, ‘dramatisation’, and ‘Novelty’. Personalisation of media stories means that “… coverage focuses upon ‘charismatic humanoids’…” with a focus on the human story (Boykoff, 2011, p. 100; Plasser, & Ulram, 2003). The consequence of this pressure has been the “… de-emphasizing issues of power, context and process” (Boykoff, 2011, p. 101; Plasser, & Ulram, 2003).
	Commercial pressures has also led to the norm of dramatisation becoming increasingly dominant in media coverage, which focuses on immediate crises instead of long term issues, and there is also greater emphasis on speculation (Boykoff, 2011). Along with dramatisation there is also the norm of novelty where issues are only covered if the approach on them or the crisis is new, which means older or continuous issues are not reported as they are not considered worthwhile news (Boykoff, 2011). Novelty has direct impact on the selection of coverage as a new angle on an issue or a new issue is seen to be of greater importance by journalists (Boykoff, 2006). Boykoff (2006, p. 205) highlights that previous research by Stocking and Leonard (1990, p. 40) shows that the influence of novelty on coverage of issues can result in an “issue-of-the-month syndrome”. Therefore, the selection and portrayal of coverage will vary between newspapers, with particularly large variation between tabloids and broadsheets due to differing focus upon the application of journalistic norms. 
	In conclusion, journalistic norms can greatly impact the selection and portrayal of news coverage. The portrayal of issues will vary as journalistic norms are in competition with each other, and there is a greater difference in the application of journalistic norms between broadsheet and tabloid newspapers as there focus on objective appearance greatly differs. In particular, the selection of the dominant issue is related to the short term pressure of commercial norms to cover ‘new’ news to sell as entertainment rather than to be produced through an long term ‘issue attention cycle’ as suggested by Downs (1972). While the portrayal issues depends upon the application of the journalistic norms which are in conflict with each other. Therefore, journalistic norms have a great impact on the short term portrayal of an issue and the selection of news.   	
 
Chapter 3: The influence of journalistic norms in the framing of climate change
	This chapter will evaluate the academic literature on the influence of journalistic norms in media coverage of climate change. To evaluate the academic literature, this chapter will seek to answer the subsidiary research question, ‘Has the effective communication of climate change to the general populace been undermined by competing journalistic norms present in the framing of the issue?’ Firstly, this chapter will examine the influence that journalistic norms have upon the framing of climate change in the mass media. Secondly, this chapter will critically examine the changing application of journalistic norms in the framing of climate change in UK newspaper coverage. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that the competing journalistic norms are problematic in the framing of climate change as they can create confusion. Public understanding of climate change is also undermined by requiring the audience to develop new frames to understand the issue.  
	The media has an important role in communicating issues to the public, which is a process of building frames to produce common understanding of an issue, with all information communicated being inherently framed (Nisbet, 2009; Vreese, 2005). The public have a dependency on the mass media to communicate information “… to expand their knowledge about the world beyond the immediate horizons of lived experience…” (Smith, 2005, p. 1471). This dependency gives the mass media great influence in the shaping of popular opinion, as the decision taken in the framing of an issue sets the agenda of public debate  (Chomsky, 1991; Mercado, 2012). 
The media framing of climate change is influenced by the application of journalistic norms that effect how journalists select to portray an issue (Boykoff, 2011; Pettenger, 2007). The influence of journalistic norms on the framing of the media coverage is important to study as they produce an institutionalised normative pressure on journalists which differ between newspapers (Boykoff, 2007; Boykoff, 2008; Boykoff, 2011; Lowrey, 2003). Therefore, the normative pressures of journalistic norms will be examined with focus upon the five journalistic norms of; ‘personalisation’, ‘dramatisation’, ‘novelty’, ‘authority-order’, and ‘balance’.
The first journalistic norm this chapter will evaluate is ‘personalisation’. Personalisation is a journalistic norm that frames news coverage with the focus upon the human story rather than the wider political and economic aspects (Boykoff, 2009; Boykoff, 2011). The consequence of framing climate change coverage with personalisation is that information on the wider issue of climate change is not given to the audience. Boykoff (2011, p. 101) argues that personalisation “… can distract media consumer-citizens from more textured analysis of climate science and governance”. This journalistic norm can also pose greater harm than just producing a distraction as the use of personalisation in coverage can report claims made by publically recognised individuals on the issue of climate change who do not have the knowledge to make such claims (Boykoff, 2011). 
An example is highlighted by Boykoff (2011, p. 104) in coverage by Fox News which reported climate change through comparing claims from the ‘former US Vice-President Al Gore’ and claims made by ‘former US Alaska governor Sarah Palin’. The claims by Sarah Palin had confused weather and climate, but these errors had “… apparently passed editorial corrections by the weight of her importance and personality-driven arguments” (Boykoff, 2011, p. 104).  Therefore, personalisation produces coverage that reduces the wider important contextual information being reported. There is also the risk that incorrect information can be given because of the focus upon personality driven claims. 
The second journalistic norm is dramatisation which focuses on the immediate crisis and speculation rather than the long term coverage of an issue (Boykoff, 2011). The framing of climate change through dramatisation means that climate change generates news coverage only if the news is sensationalist or controversial (Boykoff, 2011). The consequences of media coverage through the framing of dramatisation is serious as Ereaut and Segnit (2006, p. 7) argue that it produces the image that climate change is “… awesome, terrible, immense and beyond human control”, which means that action on climate change appears hopeless and undermines peoples motivation to “… bring about action”. Another aspect is argued by Ereaut and Segnit (2006) that the sensationalist approach can result in the audience becoming distanced from the issue of climate change as the connection between their lives and the coverage of climate change is difficult for them to see (Smith, 2005). This disconnection between people and the reporting of climate change through “… alarmism might even become secretly thrilling – effectively a form of ‘climate porn’” (Ereaut, & Segnit, 2006, p. 7). 
The third journalistic norm is novelty which is the normative pressure for either creating continuously new news stories or new hooks to an issue (Boykoff, 2011). The normative pressure of novelty means that long term issues are ignored in favour of new issues or that long term issue is only covered if a new hook is found (Boykoff, 2011; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007). The consequence of novelty in climate coverage means that long term aspects of climate change can become ignored as new crises receive coverage (Boykoff, 2011; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2007). Novelty is a key normative pressure that journalists judge the potential news stories that can be covered and this undermines coverage due to the focus on a ‘hook’ which means that key background information and long term impacts of an issue  will be ‘overlooked’ due to “… the day-to-day grind to find a new angle by deadline” (Boykoff, 2011, p. 105). Therefore, the long term issue of climate change  has the challenge of keeping news coverage focused upon it (Boykoff, 2011). 
The fourth journalistic norm is authority-order which is the media reliance on individuals and groups that are recognised by the audience as being sources of authority for the appearance of objectivity in reporting (Boykoff, 2011). These sources of authority are government officials, non-governmental organisations, and business groups (Boykoff, 2011).  Boykoff (2011, p. 108) argues that the consequence of media coverage of climate change focusing on particular sources of authority can result in coverage of the elite discourse at the expense of “… a wider range of perspectives on the complexities of climate science and governance”.                 
The final journalistic norm is balance, which is used to produce an image of objectivity in coverage. Balance is the reporting of an issue by giving a voice to both sides of a conflict “… with roughly equivalent attention” (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004; Entman, 1989, p. 30). The application of balance in coverage of scientific issues is argued by Dunwoody and Peters (1992) as offering a valuable way for journalists to check the validity of claims they are reporting as they do not have the expertise or time required to check themselves (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004). However, the consequence of balance on the reporting of climate change has been the representation of climate sceptics which hold a minority view to “… have their views amplified” and presented in near equal status to the scientific consensus of anthropogenic climate change (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004, p. 127).
Therefore, the representation of anthropogenic climate change through balance produces a misleading image that there is no consensus. The consequence of the construction of doubt in the portrayal of climate science can undermine pressure for political action and limit public pressure for regulation on carbon intensive industries (Campaign Against Climate Change, n.d.; Oreskes, & Conway, 2010). An example of the construction of doubt can be seen in the harm caused by tobacco products (Oreskes, & Conway, 2010). Doubt was created through media coverage of the ‘controversial’ issue by the tobacco industry funding research “… to discredit scientific evidence linking tobacco to cancer” (Oreskes, & Conway, 2010, p. 5). The reason that they kept the issue controversial through creating doubt in the minds of the public was that “… the tobacco industry would be safe from litigation and regulation” (Oreskes, & Conway, 2010, p, 5). The creation of doubt in climate change is argued by Oreskes and Conway (2010) to be done in the same way. An example of fossil fuel industry funding of research to create doubt can be seen by an oil company called Koch Industries which “… paid nearly US$50 million to climate denial groups and individuals between 1997 and 2009” (Campaign Against Climate Change, n.d., para 26). The consequence of the journalistic norm of balance in climate change coverage is the undermining of public pressure for political action to solve the problem.
Therefore, the influence of competing journalistic norms in the framing of climate change can impact negatively upon public understanding of the issue. Lakoff (2010) argues that there is the issue in public understanding with the complexity of climate change requiring the development of new frames to form the ‘background of understanding’. Another aspect is the requirement for the public to develop pre-existing environmental frames so that people see that the environmental issue as political (Lakoff, 2010). The difficulty in forming the key background frames needed to understand climate change is undermined by the competing journalistic norms in coverage, which can result in coverage that focuses upon human interest stories or crises without wider background information while at the same time presenting climate change as an area of debate rather than scientific consensus. 
There have been changes in the application of journalistic norms in UK national newspaper coverage of climate change. The issue of climate change has been an interest of the scientific community for a greater length of time than the issue has been covered in the media only becoming prominent in coverage during the late 1980s (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005; Pidgeon, Lorenzoni, & Poortinga, 2008). The changes to the British press during 1985 to 1988 is argued by Carvalho and Burgess (2005, p. 1462) to have been “… an important transformation…” with climate change gaining coverage in The Guardian and The Times, which depicted “… scientific knowledge on the enhanced greenhouse effect as consensual and reliable…”    
	However, from 1988 onwards there was a significant change in the framing of climate change. Carvalho and Burgess (2005, p. 1462) argues that the change in British newspaper coverage was caused by climate change becoming significant on the political agenda when “… Mrs Thatcher’s speech to the Royal Society on September 27, 1988…” warned that “… we have unwittingly begun a massive experiment with the planet itself”. Thatcher is argued by Carvalho (2007, p. 229) to have used the growing interest in climate change and the risks that climate change poses to humanity as a method “…to promote nuclear energy and dismantle the coal industry”. 
The consequence of the rise of climate change on the political agenda was a large increase in the coverage (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). In particular, the focus in coverage shifted from simplifying the science for a general audience to dramatisation with climate change framed as a major threat to human survival (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). The dramatised narrative had the effect of undermining the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] First Assessment Report in 1990 as the influence that scientists had in defining the issue of climate change in the media had changed with the news media seeking to report dramatic claims (Carvalho, 2007; Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). 
The impact of climate change upon public consciousness has been argued by Lorenzoni and Pidgeon (2006) to have been worldwide with a majority public opinion holding the issue of climate change as an important problem. In the UK two surveys in 2004 rated climate change “… as the most important environmental issue for the world today…” (Lorenzoni, & Pidgeon, 2006, p. 75). However, security and domestic issues were viewed as having a greater importance (Lorenzoni, & Pidgeon, 2006). The challenge of competing with domestic issues was highlighted in the early 1990s when the UK went into recession and climate change coverage reduced (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). 
The IPCC First Assessment in 1990 did produce coverage in particular from The Times that was framed using the norm of balance and gave a voice to climate sceptics in an effort to delegitimise the IPCC (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). The IPCC reports became a focus of media coverage in the UK national newspapers with the Second Assessment Report in 1996 being used to frame climate change with dramatisation and balanced coverage (Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). However, from 1997, Carvalho and Burgess (2005) argue that coverage improved with the scientific consensus being focused upon with a decrease in the usage of balance and a greater use of authority-order to put the need for action across to the public. 
	This change was argued by Carvalho and Burgess (2005, p, 1466) to be “… definite signs of social learning…” with journalists focusing more upon international governance. The decrease in the use of the journalistic norm of balance can be seen across national newspapers in a study by Boykoff (2007) on UK broadsheet newspapers which showed that the use of balance had decreased to close to nothing. The application of balance in the UK national tabloids was studied by Boykoff and Mansfield (2008) and found that the use of balance had dropped but not to the same levels as in the broadsheet newspapers. Therefore, the representation of the scientific consensus in UK national newspapers had greatly improved.   
In conclusion, this chapter has shown that the application of journalistic norms has a key influence in the framing of climate change to the general population. The competing journalistic norms can cause confusion and undermine the development of frames used for understanding the issue of climate change. The use of balance has the most impact as creating doubt undermines public pressure for change. At the same time dramatisation can also undermine the demand for action by making the situation appear hopeless. However, the previous research has suggested that the application of the journalistic norms of balance and dramatisation has decreased which should benefit the formation of new frames to improve understanding of the complex issue of climate change. In this study the changes in the application of journalistic norms will be examined after the triggering event of ‘Climategate’. The methodology of this study will be examined in the following chapter.    
 
Chapter 4: Methodology and hypotheses
	This chapter will be examining the methodology used in this study of the influence of journalistic norms in the framing of climate coverage in UK national newspapers, and how the application of these journalistic norms has changed since ‘Climategate’. The quantitative approach has been used for this study to examine the medium term impact that ‘Climategate’ had on the implementation of journalistic norms in UK national newspaper reporting of climate change (Brannen, 1992; Vanderstoep, & Johnston, 2009). The journalistic norms that this research project will be using to classify newspaper article coverage of climate change are the journalistic norms that are those used to produce objectivity norms of ‘balance’ and ‘authority-order’ as well as the commercial journalistic norms of ‘personalisation’, ‘dramatisation’, and ‘novelty’.
	The identification of each of the dominant journalistic norm in an article comes from recognising key aspects of each of the five norms. Firstly, the key aspect of personalisation is when an article has a focus upon a human story (Boykoff, 2011). Secondly, dramatisation has a focus on crises and speculation meaning that reports have sensationalist coverage (Boykoff, 2011; Ereaut, & Segnit, 2006). Thirdly, the journalistic norm of novelty produces pressure to find ‘new’ news or new angles on coverage (Boykoff, 2011). Fourthly, authority-order is the use of official sources recognised by the public to produce an image of objectivity (Boykoff, 2011). Finally, balance gives two sides of an issue a voice, and in the case of climate change this means that the minority of climate sceptics is given potentially equal representation as the scientific consensus of anthropogenic climate change (Boykoff, 2011; Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004).    
	This study will be critically examining the impact of ‘Climategate’ as a triggering event on media coverage on climate change and whether there was a consequence to the application of journalistic norms used to frame climate change coverage. ‘Climategate’ was a discourse used by climate sceptics to frame climate scientists as dishonest after hacked emails from the University of East Anglia Climate Research Unit were released online and used to attack climate science by suggesting that these scientists had been manipulating their data (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010). The scientists involved were exonerated of any wrong doing in investigations that followed after ‘Climategate’ (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010).  
Hypotheses:
There are three key hypotheses that this study will be testing:
H 1: ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the amount of coverage on climate change in UK national newspapers. 
H 2: ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the application of the commercial journalistic norms in UK national newspapers.
H 3: The application of journalistic norms that seek to produce objectivity by UK national newspapers was impacted by ‘Climategate’.
Method:
	This research data is collected through the use of a Lexis Nexis search using the key terms of ‘global warming’ and ‘climate change’. ‘Climategate’ was not selected as key term as the term would have only produced results after the event. The search was set to locate either of these key terms as major mentions within the time span from the 18th May 2009 to the 17th May 2010. This time frame has been selected due to the ‘Climategate’ emails being hacked in November 2009, with the latest email being from the 12th of November and being published publically online with an attempted hacker trying to post the them on the RealClimate (2010) website on the 17th November (RealClimate, 2009). Therefore, with the release of the hacked emails being the 17th of November, the time scale being looked at would place the incident of ‘Climategate’ at the centre of the year time scale. 
The UK national newspapers that this study will be examining are from both broadsheet and tabloid newspapers. The broadsheets that have been selected in this study are The Guardian, The Independent, The Times, and The Daily Telegraph. These broadsheets have been selected as most previous research has particularly focused upon The Guardian, The Independent, and The Times (Boykoff, 2007; Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). However, this study has also included The Daily Telegraph due to it having the largest daily circulation figures in November, 2009 compared to all of the other broadsheet newspapers (The Guardian, 2009).  Tabloid newspapers were selected based upon daily circulation figures in November, 2009 with the three highest being selected being The Sun, The Daily Mail, and The Mirror. The impact that tabloids have in the formation of public debate is greater than broadsheets as they have a far higher daily circulation, which can be seen in Table 1.
The result from the Lexis Nexis search was 7205 which were classified by the dominant journalistic norm. From the 7205 found by the Lexis Nexis search, only 2399 are in the sample. The articles discarded were either duplicates, not relevant to the subject of climate change, or letter/comment pages. Letter/comment pages have not been included as they are not written by journalists and therefore, are not bound by journalistic norms. The breakdown of the number of articles found by Lexis Nexis and those used in the sample by newspaper can be seen in Table 1.  
 
Table 1: UK national newspapers
Newspaper*	Daily circulation**	Broadsheet or Tabloid	Ideology***	Number of articles found	Those included in sample****
The Guardian	305,240	Broadsheet	Left of the political spectrum. 	2006	552
The Independent	186,557	Broadsheet	Bias towards the Labour party, but can also bias to the right of the political spectrum at times  	600	216
The Times	563,262	Broadsheet	Right of the political spectrum with bias towards conservative party.	2248	669
The Daily Telegraph	744,151	Broadsheet	Right wing in the political spectrum and supports the Conservative party. 	906	437
The Sun	2,958,502	Tabloid	Popular newspaper in the right of the political spectrum.	706	220
The Daily Mail	2,148,571	Tabloid	Popular newspaper in the right of the political spectrum 	261	149
The Mirror	1,260,019	Tabloid	Popular newspaper that supports the Labour party.	478	156
* Includes Sunday papers: The Observer (The Guardian), The Independent on Sunday, The Sunday Times, The Sunday Telegraph, Mail on Sunday, and The Sunday Mirror.  ** Daily circulation figures from November 2009 (The Guardian, 2009) . *** Ideology sources from Carvalho (2007), Dijk (2011), Temple (2010), and Curran and Seaton (1997). **** Articles that were not relevant, duplicates, or not written by journalists such as letters have been excluded from the sample.
 
	Each article in the sample was recorded by newspaper and monthly totals were recorded which allowed for changes in coverage to be examined (Appendix 1). These articles included in the sample were also then classified by journalistic norms for each month and recorded into the journalistic norms tally tables for each newspaper (Appendices 2-8). The articles in the sample were inputted into SPSS as cases and codified into three variables. The first variable is ‘before or after’ ‘Climategate’. The six months of coverage the 18th May 2009 to the 17th November 2009 was classified as ‘before’ the 18th November 2009 to the 17th May 2010 classified as ‘after’.  Each article is then coded under the second variable ‘newspaper’ for which newspaper the article came from. Finally, the dominant journalistic norm in the article was codified in the last variable ‘journalistic norm’.  
	The impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms has been examined to see if a significant change has occurred. The significance of ‘Climategate’ has been tested with the use of the statistical test of Pearson’s chi-square test, which compares the frequency of categorical data of the observed and expected frequencies (Field, 2009). The application of the chi-square tests allows the examination of whether there is a statistically significant impact of ‘Climategate’ in the application of journalistic norms. However, the chi-square test requires a minimum expected value of five in each cell as an expected value of less than five would potentially make the chi-square test inaccurate. The solution to this problem was to apply a second statistical test of Fisher’s exact test that would correct for the potential inaccuracy (Field, 2009).
	After examining whether the significance of ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the application of journalistic norms, there was an analysis of the changes in the percentage use of journalistic norms in each newspaper presented in two stacked bar charts. These two stacked bar charts allowed for direct comparison of the percentage use of each journalistic norm by each newspaper six months before and after ‘Climategate’ took place. There will also be examples of articles that will be analysed qualitatively to highlight the impact that the norms had on the framing of climate change. 

 
Chapter 5: Results
	This chapter will be critically examining the results of the study and will seek to accept or reject the study hypotheses. This chapter will be structured into two sections. Firstly, this chapter will examine the impact of ‘Climategate’ on the general trend of climate change coverage in UK national newspapers. Secondly, this chapter will evaluate whether there was a significant impact from ‘Climategate’ with the application of journalistic norms on each of the UK national newspapers and will critically compare the application of journalistic norms before and after ‘Climategate’. Ultimately, this chapter will argue that ‘Climategate’ had a major impact in the application of journalistic norms used in the framing of climate change coverage in UK national newspapers.
Coverage Trend 
	This first section will examine the general impact onto the amount of coverage that climate change received in UK national newspapers. The trend of newspaper coverage can be seen in Figure 1 which shows that all newspapers in the sample peak in coverage during the month after ‘Climategate’. The reason for this large peak is potentially due to two factors which are ‘Climategate’ and also the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen which took place between the 7th of December to the 18th of December (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2009). The time frame of the Copenhagen conference would place the majority of coverage in the same month after ‘Climategate’ which can explain the sudden peak in climate coverage, particularly in the broadsheet newspapers.	 
Figure 1: Total Coverage
  Figure 1 produced from data in Appendix 1 
	The timing of ‘Climategate’ could be argued to not be a simple a coincidence that the Copenhagen conference was taking place soon after the leaking of the emails. The motivation for the individual or group responsible for the hacked emails from the Climate Research Unit can only be speculated as they have not been caught (Boykoff, 2011; Greenpeace, 2010). The emails from the University of East Anglia Climate Research Unit were used to discredit the scientists, such as director Professor Phil Jones, from the Climate Research Unit which had contributed to the scientific consensus (Boykoff, 2011; Greenpeace, 2010; Nerlich, 2010). These emails were used to spread a sceptic discourse of the dishonesty of climate scientists and included sceptics using the emails to claim that climate change was a ‘global conspiracy’ (Greenpeace, 2010; Nerlich, 2010). The discourse from climate sceptics are argued by Greenpeace (2010, p. 13) to have had claims that “… some of the media were all too willing to repeat”. 
These emails did not damage the scientific consensus and the scientists involved in the email scandal were exonerated in the inquiries that followed (Boykoff, 2011; Greenpeace, 2010). However, ‘Climategate’ did allow for the climate sceptics to get their discourse in the UK national newspapers during a period when the coverage of climate change greatly increased. Previous research by Boykoff (2011) has shown the coverage that ‘Climategate’ received had been less than the coverage of the Copenhagen conference, but does highlight that ‘Climategate’ coverage had the potential to create and sustain doubt in climate science. 
While the amount of coverage given to ‘Climategate’ is important, there are also the implications on changes to how the UK national newspapers frame climate change. These implications will be critically examined in the following section which will focus upon whether the impact onto the application of journalistic norms in the framing of climate change was significant in each UK national newspaper and what shifts in application took place.
Impact of ‘Climategate’
	This section will be critically examining whether ‘Climategate’ had a significant impact on the application of journalistic norms in each of the seven UK national newspapers in this study. To critically examine the impact of ‘Climategate’, this section will evaluate the results of chi-square tests for each newspaper (Tables 2-8) and directly compare the changes in the application of journalistic norms from before and after ‘Climategate’ which can be seen in figures 2 and 3. Nearly all of the chi-square tests had an expected value of at least five in each cell. Table 2 and Table 7 both had one cell with an expected value under five so Fisher’s Exact test was used in both as the expected value being under 5 would have a risk of the loss of ‘statistical power’ (Field, 2009, p. 692).   

 
Figure 2: The application of Journalistic norms before ‘Climategate’
 Figure 3: Stacked bar chart produced from data in appendices 2-8.
Figure 3: The application of Journalistic norms after ‘Climategate’
 Figure 3: Stacked bar chart produced from data in appendices 2-8.
 
	Firstly, the impact of ‘Climategate’ onto The Guardian will be examined. The result from the chi-square test shows that the impact of ‘Climategate’ onto the application of journalistic norms is significant at the 1% level (Table 2). The changes on the application percentage of journalistic norms in climate change before and after ‘Climategate’ had an impact in particular to the application of personalisation (Figure 2-3). The application of personalisation increased from 9.434% to 16.72% after ‘Climategate’.
Table 2: Chi-square test for The Guardian
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 73 	Dramatisation    n = 61	Novelty     n = 159	Authority-order n = 249	Balance 
n = 10
Before
n = 265	9.434%	13.96%	30.94%	44.91%	0.755%
After
n = 287	16.72%	8.362%	26.83%	45.30%	2.787%
Pearson Chi-Square	13.405**
Table 2 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 2. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
Examples of personalisation after ‘Climategate’ can be seen in the reports of the consequences with a personal focus on Professor Phil Jones with articles such as one by Jha (2009) who reported Phil Jones had to stand down as director of the Climate Research Unit due to investigation into the hacked emails. However, other examples of personalisation were used to frame the importance of dealing with climate change. For example an article by McKie (2009) focuses on five babies and their families from 5 different regions to explain the impact climate change will have in shaping their futures. The mother of baby Olomaina Mutonka said in the interview on the impact of changing weather patterns increasing droughts that the “The baby is a blessing, but he is also a burden because I have so little to give him. Because we have lost so much…” (McKie, 2009, para 30). This application of personalisation frames the issue of climate change as important to deal with by focusing upon the human story of an individual’s future affected by climate change.  	
There was also a small increase in the use of balance which increased from 0.755% to 2.787%. The very small amount of the application of balance before ‘Climategate’ is expected due to previous research by Boykoff (2007) who showed that UK broadsheets had eliminated the use of balance so their coverage reflected the scientific consensus. While in this case the impact on the increased use of balance is small, but it is not unexpected as ‘Climategate’ gave the opportunity for the climate sceptic discourse to gain media coverage (Nerlich, 2010).
	However, rather than ‘Climategate’ undermining the aim of the broadsheet newspapers in producing the image of objective coverage, the use of the authority-order has a very minor increase while the larger increase in personalisation has taken place at the expense of the norms of dramatisation and novelty. Both of these commercial norms have decreased in the use of framing coverage of climate change. Overall, the impact on the application of journalistic norms is significant, but has not undermined the use of authority-order with other commercial norms decreasing with the increased use of personalisation. 
	The second newspaper that this section will examine is The Independent. The result from the chi-square test shows that the impact that ‘Climategate’ had on to the application of journalistic norms is statistically significant at the 1% level (Table 3). The changes in the application of journalistic norms of authority-order and balance were particularly impacted by ‘Climategate’. Authority-order had a major decrease from 50.55% to 41.6%, while novelty also had a decrease from 29.67% to 23.2% (figure 2-3). These decreases can be explained by the major increase of 15.2% in the application of balance which before ‘Climategate’ had not been used.        
Table 3: Chi-square test for The Independent
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 15	Dramatisation
n = 28	Novelty
n = 56	Authority-order
n =98	Balance
n =19
Before
n = 91	7.692%	12.09%	29.67%	50.55%	0%
After
n = 125	6.4%	13.6%	23.2%	41.6%	15.2%
Pearson chi-square 	15.832**
Table 3 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 3. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
	Balance had not been used in the framing of climate change coverage for the previous six months before ‘Climategate’. An example of the new rise of balanced coverage was an article written by Connor (2009) that gives a balance between climate sceptics claim of ‘natural warming’ due to solar activity and climate scientists critique of this claim. The article by Connor (2009) had an overarching aim to use balance to critique the argument that the sun is responsible for global warming made by climate sceptics. In this article the use of balance was a manner to challenge climate sceptic claims that had risen in media coverage after ‘Climategate’ due to the sudden splash of coverage climate scepticism received (Boykoff, 2011). Overall, the most significant change in the application of journalistic norms in The Independent came from the very large decrease of authority-order and the rise of balance.
	The third newspaper in this section that will be examined is The Times. The result from the chi-square test shows that the impact of ‘Climategate’ had a statistically significant impact on the application of journalistic norms at the 0.1% level (Table 4). There was a major impact on the application of journalistic norms with major decreases in the application of authority-order from 51.42% to 36.18% and dramatisation which decreased from 13.12% to 5.943%. The application of novelty remained mostly the same with a slight change from 30.50% to 29.72%. There were two major increases in the application of journalistic norms with personalisation having a large increase from 3.901% to 17.83%, and the journalistic norm of balance increasing from 1.064% to 10.34%.  
Table 4: Chi-square test for The Times
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation  n = 80	Dramatisation  n = 60	Novelty  n = 201	Authority-order n = 285	Balance    n = 43
Before  n = 282	3.901%	13.12%	30.50%	51.42%	1.064%
After     n = 387	17.83%	5.943%	29.72%	36.18%	10.34%
Pearson chi-square	66.586***
Table 4 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 4. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
	The increased application of the journalistic norm of personalisation in the framing of climate scientists as untrustworthy focused particularly on Professor Phil Jones. An example can be seen in coverage following ‘Climategate’ with an article by Leake (2009) called ‘The great climate science scandal’. The article begins with establishing the position and importance of Professor Phil Jones in the Climate Research Unit and then portrays selected leaked emails so that Professor Phil Jones appears to have been manipulating information: 
“In one, Jones boasted of using statistical "tricks" to obliterate apparent declines in global temperature. In another he advocated deleting data rather than handing them to climate sceptics. And in a third he proposed organised boycotts of journals that had the temerity to publish papers that undermined the message” (Leake, 2009, para 6). 
	The article by Leake (2009) did give a significant voice to climate change sceptics which managed to gain a strong voice in The Times particularly through the use of balance. An example of an article using balance can be seen in an article by Webster (2009) called ‘2010 will be the warmest year on record, predicts Met Office’. This article was framed by focusing on comments from Greenpeace which said that if 2010 was the hottest year on record that it should produce some effect of “… exploding the myth, spread by the climate conspiracy theorists, that we're experiencing global cooling” (Webster, 2009, para 7-9). The comment from Greenpeace was balanced by comments from the climate sceptic organisation ‘The Global Warming Policy Foundation’ which accused the Met Office of exaggerating claims of anthropogenic climate change effects with the prediction being a ‘political intervention’ to increase pressure on the Copenhagen talks (Webster, 2009, para 7-9). Overall, the main changes in coverage where the rise of personalisation that was used to undermine public trust in climate scientists and the rise of balance which highlights the increased use of climate sceptic discourse in the coverage when both of these norms were nearly non-existent in application before ‘Climategate’.   
	The forth newspaper that this section will examine is The Daily Telegraph. The result of the chi-square test shows that the impact of ‘Climategate’ was statistically significant at the 1% level (Table 5). The largest impact was on the application of the journalistic norm of balance which had a large increase after ‘Climategate’ from 10.23% to 24.14%. The application of balance before ‘Climategate’ does not fit with the claim of previous research by Boykoff (2007) that coverage in UK broadsheet newspapers had been almost wiped out with only 0.4% of coverage using the journalistic norm of balance. This difference between the application of balance in The Daily Telegraph application of balance and research by Boykoff (2007) can be explained due to The Daily Telegraph not being included in the study. The application of personalisation remained stable at 13.07% to 13.03% while the other journalistic norms of dramatisation, novelty, and authority-order decreased. 
Table 5: Chi-square test for The Daily Telegraph
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 57	Dramatisation
n = 52	Novelty
n = 99	Authority-order
n = 148	Balance
n = 81
Before
n = 176	13.07%	13.07%	26.70%	36.93%	10.23%
After
n = 261	13.03%	11.11%	19.92%	31.80%	24.14%
Pearson chi-square	14.263**
Table 5 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 5. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
	The result from The Daily Telegraph shows a key impact on the application of balance. An example can be seen in an article by Gray (2009) called ‘solar activity is to blame, say scientific sceptics’ which focuses on a claim made by climate sceptics that the sun is to blame for global warming. This is the same topic that Connor (2009) wrote an article on in The Independent. However, the framing of the coverage is distinctively different with the article by Gray (2009, para 18) because it has directly given a greater voice to the climate sceptic discourse and the claim only balanced by a short section by climate scientists that points out that the claim that the sun is responsible by climate sceptics have been “… thoroughly debunked over and over again”. Conversely, the article by Connor (2009) in The Independent only gave the sceptic arguments coverage in an overarching critique of their claim. The framing of the claims in Gray’s (2009) article is designed to give the impression that the disagreement came from ‘scientific sceptics’ to give the appearance that anthropogenic climate change did not have scientific consensus. Overall, the application of balance was the most impacted journalistic norm by ‘Climategate’ as this gave The Daily Telegraph a strong climate sceptic discourse in covering climate change compared to the other broadsheet newspapers.    
	The fifth newspaper this chapter will examine is The Sun. The result of the chi-squared test shows that the impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms was statistically significant at the 1% level (Table 6). The two large changes in the application of journalistic norms in The Sun was the increase of balance from 0% to 13.01% after ‘Climategate’, while there was also a decrease in the application of the journalistic norm of dramatisation which prior to ‘Climategate’ had been one of the most dominant norms at 32.99% but reduced to 17.83%. Both personalisation and authority-order had slight increases in application while novelty had a small decrease. 
Table 6: Chi-square test for The Sun
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 29	Dramatisation
n = 54	Novelty
n = 92	Authority-order
n = 29	Balance
n = 16
Before
n = 97	11.34%	32.99%	43.30%	12.37%	0%
After
n = 123	14.63%	17.83%	40.65%	13.82%	13.01%
Pearson chi-square	18.282**
Table 6 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 6. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
	In particular The Sun had two major shifts in coverage with the first being the rise of balance, which before ‘Climategate’ had not been applied to climate change coverage, and the second being the largest decrease in application of dramatisation compared to the other newspapers in the study. Firstly, the rise of the journalistic norm of balance introduced a climate sceptic discourse. An example can be seen in the article by MacKenzie (2010) called the ‘Cold truth about climate’ which reports that the Arctic ice had increased according to a study by the US National Snow and Ice Data Center. The article did note that climate scientists pointed out this did not call into question the science of climate change. However, the rest of the article is framed in climate sceptic discourse with MacKenzie (2010, para 6) directly addressing the audience with the question “have you noticed that all the politicians have gone ever so quiet about global warming?” 
	Secondly, the impact onto dramatisation was a large decrease in use which before ‘Climategate’ was the second most used journalistic norm after novelty in climate coverage. Examples of dramatic claims made before ‘Climategate’ can be seen in an article by Peake (2009) called ‘Piranha in Devon; flesh-eating fish spotted’. The article makes the claim that piranha could spread to Britain because of global warming and uses dramatic descriptions of piranhas such as ‘blood-thirsty beasts’. These dramatic claims were made because a dead piranha that had been released into the river Torridge by its owner and was found by an Environment Agency worker. The article acknowledges this information but the story is framed in a way that aims to produce fear of climate change (Peake, 2009). Overall, there has been an increase in climate sceptic discourse while the dramatised articles such as the piranha example have decreased since ‘Climategate’.      
	The sixth newspaper that this section will examine is The Daily Mail. The result of the chi-squared test showed that there was no statistical significance from the impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms (Table 7). In particular, the changes on the application of journalistic norms had a large impact on the application of personalisation which increased from 9.302% to 23.81% after ‘Climategate’. The application of balance increased from 11.63% to 19.05% as well, while the application of dramatisation, novelty, and authority-order all decreased.     
 
Table 7: Chi-square test for The Daily Mail
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 29	Dramatisation
n = 12	Novelty
n = 58	Authority-order
n = 24	Balance
n = 25
Before
n = 43	9.302%	13.95%	44.19%	20.93%	11.63%
After
n = 105	23.81%	5.714%	37.14%	14.29%	19.05%
Pearson chi-square	8.042 
Table 7 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 7. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
	The key change in the application of journalistic norms was the large increase of personalisation. An example of personalisation can be seen in the article by Derbyshire (2009) called ‘Scientist in climate change ‘cover-up’ storm told to quit’ which called for Professor Phil Jones to stand down after the release of the emails and portrayed him as manipulating data. The article by Derbyshire (2009) framed the focus onto Professor Phil Jones in particular and portrayed the climate scientists as untrustworthy by then trying to silence climate sceptics:
“'Worse still, some of the emails suggest efforts to prevent the publication of work by climate sceptics, or to keep it out of a report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.” (Derbyshire, 2009, para 11).  
	The framing of the article in this way was an attempt to undermine the image of scientific consensus in the eyes of the public by suggesting that climate researchers were being silenced. Overall, the climate sceptic discourse increased in The Daily Mail with particular rise on the attempts to undermine the public image of climate scientists, much like the coverage seen in The Times.    
	The seventh UK national newspaper that this section will focus on is The Mirror. The result from the chi-square test shows the impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms is statistically significant at the 0.1% level (Table 8). There were four journalistic norms that had a large change in application before and after ‘Climategate’. There was a large increase in both balance from 0% to 17.28% and authority-order from 10.67% to 25.93%. There was also a large decrease in the application of novelty from 44% to 20.99% and a smaller decrease in the application of personalisation from 18.67% to 11.11%. 
Table 8: Chi-square test for The Mirror
	Journalistic norm
	Personalisation
n = 23	Dramatisation
n = 40	Novelty
n = 50	Authority-order
n = 29	Balance
n = 14
Before
 n = 75	18.67%	26.67%	44%	10.67%	0%
After
n = 81	11.11%	24.69%	20.99%	25.93%	17.28%
Pearson chi-square	25.842***
Table 8 created from SPSS output with data in Appendix 8. * Significant at 5%; ** Significant at 1%; *** Significant at 0.1%. 
The increase in the use of authority-order is interesting as it was the largest increase in all the newspapers in the study after the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ with most newspapers decreasing use with only The Sun and The Guardian having slight increases. Another interesting increase was the greater use of balance in The Mirror which increased as did all the other UK newspapers included in the sample. However, the application of balance by The Mirror differs to the other tabloid newspapers which can be seen in the article by Swain (2009c) called ‘The heat is on; world is at its hottest for 160 years’ as the coverage is much more like the coverage from The Independent where climate sceptics claim of global cooling is given coverage to be criticised by climate scientists.   
The Mirror sides to a greater extent with the anthropogenic climate change consensus in the coverage of climate change. An article by Swain (2009b) ‘Forget the climate sceptics, the real experts are scared; three days to save the world countdown to Copenhagen’ interviews the chief climate advisor at the Met Office in a structure of asking for responses to climate sceptic calms. An example is:
“Q Hasn't the climate been getting cooler since 1998?
A We had a very warm year in 1998 and we haven't had a year anything like as warm as that. It was a record breaking year because of a very strong El Nino (warming of waters in Eastern Pacific)” (Swain, 2009b, para 14-15). 
	The supportive position to climate change consensus can also be seen in the large use of dramatisation which only had a slight decrease after ‘Climategate’ but was used in reports of Copenhagen that were framed in articles such as an article by Swain (2009a) called ‘A drowning land; six days to save the world’ which uses dramatisation to encourage reader support for dealing with climate change and stresses the importance of Copenhagen. In general, The Mirror is supportive towards climate scientists both before and after ‘Climategate’. However, the application of dramatisation can undermine support for political action by making the situation appear hopeless and the challenge of anthropogenic climate change to be so great that people lose motivation (Ereaut, & Segnit, 2006).    
	Overall, the impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ onto the application of journalistic norms  in coverage of climate change in UK national newspapers was statistically significant at least to the 1% level in all but The Daily Mail which was the only exception as the chi-square test produced a result that was not statistically significant (Tables 2-8). The application of journalistic norms before ‘Climategate’ broadly fits the expected pattern for the differences between broadsheets and tabloids with a greater application of the journalistic norms of objectivity in broadsheets and a greater application of commercial norms in tabloids (Boykoff, 2008; Deuze, 2005; Lowrey, 2003). These expected differences in tabloid and broadsheet newspaper application of journalistic norms in coverage remains after ‘Climategate’ but tabloids have increased their usage of the journalistic norms of objectivity with the total use by The Mirror being only slightly lower than The Times and The Guardian. 
The ideological differences between newspapers does mean that the direct comparison between the percentage of the application of each journalistic norms before and after ‘Climategate’ needs to be examined and highlights some interesting changes that took place (Figures 2-3). In particular, personalisation had increased in application across nearly all of the newspapers examined in the study with The Daily Telegraph only having a slight increase in usage while The Mirror was the only newspaper that decreased. Another key impact was on the application of balance which increased in application in all of the newspapers in this study and mostly had large increases in most newspaper when the journalistic norm had been almost non-existent in use before ‘Climategate’ except in The Daily Mail and The Daily Telegraph.
Another impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ was the decreased application of the journalistic norms of dramatisation, novelty, and authority-order. The application of dramatisation decreased as a result of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ in nearly all newspapers in the study with the exception of The Mirror which had a slight increase. Novelty was similarly affected by ‘Climategate’ with all newspapers in the study decreased. However, the impact of ‘Climategate’ onto the application of authority-order is more diverse than the other four norms, but authority-order did mostly decrease with The Times having the largest decrease. The only newspapers increasing in application of authority-order was a slight increase in The Guardian and a large increase in The Mirror. 
The result of this study highlights the differences between newspaper applications of journalistic norms, but in particular personalisation and balance had key increases in the framing of climate change coverage in the UK national newspapers after ‘Climategate’. The following section of this chapter will seek to accept or reject the research hypotheses of this study. 
Conclusion
	In conclusion, the impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ was important in both coverage trends of climate change and the application of journalistic norms. The impact on coverage can be seen by the peaks in all newspapers after ‘Climategate’ took place, but the direct impact is difficult to judge as Copenhagen took place in the month directly after ‘Climategate’ and the increase of coverage could have been produced by both events creating greater public interest in climate change as well as in each other. Therefore, the research hypothesis of ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the amount of coverage on climate change in UK national newspapers’ can be partly accepted as the direct impact of ‘Climategate’ is difficult to judge and is a limitation in this study.
	The triggering event of ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the application of journalistic norms in UK national newspapers. The impact onto the application of the commercial norms was in particular the increase of personalisation in all newspapers with the exception of The Mirror, while the decreases across all newspapers in the application of novelty and dramatisation with the an exception of The Independent that had slightly increased use of dramatisation. Therefore, the research hypothesis of ‘Climategate’ had an impact on the application of the commercial journalistic norms in UK national newspapers’ can be accepted.
	The impact of the application of the journalistic norms in producing the appearance of objectivity was a large increase in the application of balance across all newspapers with The Guardian being the only exception as the increase in balance was small. The application of balance means that climate sceptic discourse returned to the majority of UK newspapers which previously had been nearly wiped out in UK coverage of climate change (Boykoff, 2007; Boykoff, & Mansfield, 2008). On the other hand the application of authority-order was impacted in a more diverse way with most having a decrease in application except for The Guardian that had a slight increase and The Mirror that had a large increase. Therefore, the research hypothesis ‘The application of journalistic norms that seek to produce objectivity by UK national newspapers was impacted by ‘Climategate’’ can be accepted. 
	Therefore, the impact of ‘Climategate’ was a significant triggering event that changed the application of journalistic norms used in the framing of climate change in UK newspaper coverage. However, there are limitations to this study which will be examined in the concluding chapter. 
 
Discussion and Conclusion
This chapter will discuss the findings of this dissertation and will seek to accept or reject the research hypothesis. This chapter will be structured in four sections. Firstly, this chapter will discuss the findings of this dissertation and evaluate the results to other academic research. Secondly, this chapter will critically examine the limitations that emerged in this study. Thirdly, this chapter will be the overall conclusion of the dissertation findings and will seek to accept or reject the research hypothesis. Finally, this chapter will propose potential areas for future research.   
Discussion
	This dissertation has shown that media framing is important in the setting of the agenda for public debate. Framing is an inherent process as all information is framed (Nisbet, 2009). In particular, competing journalistic norms can influence the framing of the media coverage of issues in different ways depending upon the journalistic norm. The effect of the journalistic norms on the coverage of climate change can have a key influence on how the framing of climate change is portrayed. In particular the competing journalistic norms can cause differing effects in the audience with dramatisation potentially disheartening the audience and undermining political action, while the application of balance creates public doubt and confusion in climate change consensus (Boykoff, 2011; Ereaut, & Segnit, 2006). 
The consequence of competing journalistic norms is the confusion that they create to the audience as it undermines the development of the frames required for the audience to understand the complex issue of climate change (Lakoff, 2010). A key norm that undermines climate change understanding in particular is balance which creates doubt in the scientific consensus of anthropogenic climate science as climate sceptic claims are given potentially equal coverage as the climate change consensus and thus, makes anthropogenic climate change look like an area of debate (Boykoff, & Boykoff, 2004; Oreskes, & Conway, 2010), The results from this study highlighted that the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ did cause a re-emergence of the journalistic norm of balance in climate coverage along with the increased usage of personalisation with focus on Professor Phil Jones to delegitimise him and other climate scientists at the Climate Research Unit. 
The long term impact of ‘Climategate’ could be examined in future research as this study has highlighted the significance of the medium term impact. Triggering events have been shown to have long term impact in previous research with the speech by Thatcher in 1988 argued by Carvalho and Burgess (2005) to have altered the UK media coverage of climate change from a focus on explaining the science of climate change to the public to the use of the journalistic norm of dramatisation to frame climate coverage. The consequence of the dominance of dramatisation was the triggering events of the first and second IPCC reports were undermined in their impact in framing media coverage and resulted in coverage being focused upon dramatic claims while both these events also resulted in the rise of application of balance (Carvalho, 2007; Carvalho, & Burgess, 2005). Carvalho and Burgess (2005) argue that from 1997 onwards there has been a change in the application of journalistic norms with balance and dramatisation decreasing in use. 
The argument by Carvalho and Burgess (2005) can be seen in other research which has shown that the application in particular of the journalistic norm of balance had greatly decreased in both UK tabloid and broadsheet newspapers (Boykoff, 2007; Boykoff, & Mansfield, 2008). This study found that prior to the triggering event of ‘Climategate’, balance was rarely used, but there was one anomaly in the expected results as The Daily Telegraph had been using balance frequently. However, the initial study in UK broadsheet newspapers by Boykoff (2007) did not examine coverage of the Daily Telegraph which had been using the application of balance far greater than any other newspaper. Therefore, the impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ was significant in changing the application of journalistic norms in the medium term with the re-emergence of the use of balance to frame climate change which has given a voice to the climate sceptic discourses that had previously been removed from coverage of climate change. The application of balance was significant but there was also the increase in the application of personalisation across some of newspapers as the climate scientists were focused upon with reports trying to discredit them as misleading the public (Boykoff, 2011; Nerlich, 2010).  
However, there were some limitations to this study that will be examined in the following section.     
Limitations
	There are a number of limitations of this study. In particular, there are two limitations in the analysis of the impact of ‘Climategate’ that will be focused on in this section. Firstly, the limitation to coverage trend analysis in this study. Secondly, there is an issue with the focus being upon the dominant journalistic norm in categorising articles. These could potentially be resolved in future research.
The first limitation emerged in the recording of the coverage trend. The coverage trend shows that overall coverage peaks directly after ‘Climategate’. The direct impact of ‘Climategate’ is not shown as the timing of ‘Climategate’ was most likely timed in an attempt to try to undermine the Copenhagen conference  (Boykoff, 2011). However the aim of the hack is speculation as the responsible person or group is not known (Boykoff, 2011). The result from Copenhagen taking place in the month after ‘Climategate’ does mean that the sole impact onto coverage from ‘Climategate’ cannot be presumed from the peak . 
A potential solution to this limitation in future research would be to record each article after ‘Climategate’ into the categories of ‘Climategate’ coverage, Copenhagen coverage, or coverage of other climate stories. This would allow examination of the short term impact on the total coverage caused by ‘Climategate’. However, even then the true impact on the amount of coverage that ‘Climategate’ received could be dependent upon the increased interest because of Copenhagen and vice versa. Therefore, this limitation cannot be easily ratified  by simply measuring coverage separately as each event may have produced increased coverage of the other, but recording the focus would allow for analysis by newspaper and allow for examination which newspapers focused upon ‘Climategate’ to a greater extent than others. 
The second limitation is the focus upon the dominant journalistic norm in the reporting of climate change coverage. By solely focusing on the dominant journalistic norm in an article it does mean that any changes in the application of secondary journalistic norms in the articles have not been examined to see whether these significantly changed. This limitation could be corrected in future work by recording the secondary journalistic norm. These could examine whether the change between the dominant journalistic norms had been by norms that previously had a secondary role before ‘Climategate’ or had emerged separately after the triggering event. 
Conclusion
	In conclusion, this dissertation has shown that the application of journalistic norms has a strong influence upon the framing of climate change and the study of the impact of the triggering event of ‘Climategate’ has revealed interesting results. In particular, the results of the study showed that ‘Climategate’ was statistically significant at least to the 1% level in nearly all UK national newspapers in this study apart from The Daily Mail which was not statistically significant. This study showed that the impact of ‘Climategate’ was on both the commercial journalistic norms, in particular the application of personalisation, and the professional journalistic norms which had a major impact on the application of balance.  These two journalistic norms were used to frame climate change with personalisation used discredit the climate scientists with focus upon emails from Professor Phil Jones and the production of a climate sceptic framing of coverage with the application of balance. Therefore, the impact that ‘Climategate’ had upon the framing of Climate changes means that the research hypothesis of ‘‘Climategate’ had a major impact in the application of journalistic norms in UK national newspapers coverage of climate change’ can be accepted. However, this research study did highlight the potential for future research in media coverage of climate change which will be examined in the following section. 
Future research 
	There is a lot of potential for future research in this area of research. Some potential research could be carried out on the longer term impact of ‘Climategate’ on the application of journalistic norms as this research was only focused on the medium term of six months before and after. There is a range of potential future research that could be carried out focusing on the application of journalistic norms. In particular, there are three potential further studies analysing the application of journalistic norms that could be carried out. 
Firstly, focusing on UK newspapers for a longer period of time would allow for analysis of whether ‘Climategate’ had a long term impact in the reporting of climate change in UK newspapers. Secondly, further research could also focus on differing triggering events to examine how the application of journalistic norms alters to each event. This would allow for comparison of the impact of differing types of triggering events changes the application of journalistic norms in the media framing of climate change. This future research could potentially examine a selected time frame and contrast the impacts of differing triggering events over the time frame such as comparing the effects of a natural disaster to an international climate agreement and whether there was a short term or prolonged impact in the application of journalistic norms. Finally, there could be an international comparison between UK and US or UK and European newspapers which would allow for analysis of whether ‘Climategate’ had a wide ranging effect and to what extent ‘Climategate’ gained coverage outside the UK. 
	There is the potential for alternative research on the impact ‘Climategate’ with the examination of the changing discourse frames being used to frame climate change in national newspaper coverage, and to what extent the application of discourses changed after ‘Climategate’ took place. This potential study can be over the long or medium term or comparative between differing nation’s national newspaper coverage. Ultimately, there is a potential for a range of research into the application of journalistic norms and the impact of triggering events or further research into the direct impact of ‘Climategate’ with the potential for international comparative analysis between national newspapers from different countries or further research into whether ‘Climategate’ had a long term impact.     
